BERNARD MANDEVILLE 

(1670-1733) 



THE 
FABLE 

OF 
THE 



EDITED WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY IRWIN PRIMER 




Mandeville 

The fable of the bees 



63-158^8 



170 M27f 63-158^8 

Mandeville $1.65 
The fable of the bees 




0001 0272i?so 7 




2,?- 



-SEP- 1963 



THE 



FABLE OF THE BEES 



or Private Vices, Publicfc Benefits 



Newly Edited, with an Introduction by 



IRWIN PRIMER 



DEPARTMENT OP ENGLISH, RUTGERS UNIVERSITY 



CAPRICORN BOOKS, NEW YOBK 



Copyright 1962, by Irwin Primer 



Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 62-8169 



MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 



CONTENTS 

Pages 

INTRODUCTION 1 

A Note on this Edition 19 

Suggested Readings 20 

Mandeville's "Preface" to the Fable, Part I. 21 

The Grumbling Hive: or, Knaves Turrid Honest 27 

The Introduction 39 

An Inquiry into the Origin of Moral Virtue 41 

flattery instrumental in civilizing the savage the political 
origin of virtue and vice opposes Sir Richard Steele's 
praise of human nature Alexander the Great: pride, ambi- 
tion, lust for fame ethical judgments require a knowledge 
of the agent's motivation this account of the origin of moral 
virtue not offensive to Christianity. 

Remarks: 51 

Line 101. Definitions of honor, dishonor, and shame on fe- 
male modesty shame proceeds from pride, and is necessary 
to make us sociable on chastity shame and modesty not 
innate but acquired, and not necessarily virtues definition 
of manners and good breeding the pleasures of hidden 

Pride ' KANSAS KTY iMO.^ CJ8UC LIBRARY 

Line 163. Virtue is made friends with vke. _ _ 63 



CONTENTS 



Pages 



Line 167. Even the dregs of society are beneficial the evil 64 
effects of gin on the poor, and the good derived from the sale 
of gin. 

Line 173. Opposing groups assist each other virtuous 70 
women unknowingly promote prostitution virtue depend- 
ent upon the existence of vice prostitution in Amsterdam, 
Italy, England and Germany. 

Line 180. [a] On prodigality and avarice frugality, like 74 
honesty, a mean starving virtue prodigality and avarice, in 
their interaction, a good medicine for society. 

Line 180. [b] On luxury a strict definition of it luxury 77 
more beneficial than frugality to a nation example of 
trade with Turkey the need for a favorable balance of trade 
other requisites "to aggrandize a nation" luxury need 
not be enervating the working classes love and honour 
luxury not incompatible with a well-kept army. 

Line 182. On pride a definition pride odious to all, hence 86 
all are troubled with it pride in clothing pecuniary emu- 
lation, or the ladder of fashion the enjoyment of well- 
disguised pride. 

Line 183, On envy, a compound of grief and anger among 94 
various groups: the fair, the rude and unpolished, men of 
letters, and even animals envy related to emulation envy 
among children, painters, married women envy breeds 
malice on hope, and "a certain hope" what is meant by 
love the conflict of the sexual impulse and strict morality 
on Platonic love, and its hypocrisy. 

Line 200. On pleasure the dispute as to what Epicurus 103 
meant by pleasure the pleasures of "the worldly-minded, 
voluptuous, and ambitious man," and how he covets the 
good opinion of the world the Stoic philosophy, basically 
maintained by most wise men since Mandeville's realistic 
view of pleasure: not what men say is best, but what they 
seem most pleased with the difficulty of rendering the 
passions subordinate to reason a luxurious manner of liv- 



CONTENTS 

Pages 

ing, not necessary to awe the multitude the real pleasures 
of all men are worldly and sensual, hence the recurring 
contradictions in men's theory and practice. 

Line 201. On the state of the poor many things formerly 110 
regarded as luxuries for the rich, now the necessities of the 
poor examples: beer, feather pillows inconsistency in 
customs: meat-eating, burial of the dead animal killing: 
the fable of the lion and the Roman merchant Descartes 9 
notions of animal life, opposed. 

Line 307. On frugality national frugality not beneficial 119 
frugality proportionate to national production how to make 
a nation prosperous: guarding of property, encouragement 
of trade and navigation opinion from Sir William Tem- 
ple the decline of Spain traced to her importation of bul- 
lion full employment necessary for national happiness 
national wealth consists in the fruits of the earth and labor. 

Line 321. Further remarks on honor, in its figurative sense 125 
men of honor, only among people of the better sort cour- 
age required by men of honor analysis of courage its 
relation to fear and to our appetites peaceful society de- 
pendent upon man's fear of punishment how to inspire 
courage in men Tarquin and Lucretia pride in self-sacri- 
fice Bruno and Vanini pride in soldiers on duelling 
moderti honor directly opposite to the principles of religion. 

Line 367. On the luxury of married women the evils to 142 
which they compel their husbands but much of the na- 
tion's prosperity dependent upon "the deceit and vile strata- 
gems of women" people ought to be virtuous, but national 
wealth requires the vices of man Mandeville does not ex- 
pect the approval of the multitude his preference for 
virtue sketch of a nation returned to virtue, and objections 
by an Epicure. 

Line 411. On decency and convenience: their ambiguity, 150 
and dependence upon social rank postscript, including a 
summary of Mandeville's doctrines. 



CONTENTS 



Pages 



A Search into the Nature of Society 155 

Mandeville's opposition to Shaftesbury's views on virtue, 
vice and human nature Mandeville's aesthetic and ethical 
relativism changing tastes in flowers, in beards, in clothing, 
in church architecture, in burial vestments, in morals (wit- 
ness polygamy) and in religion itself our reason sub- 
servient to our passions Shaftesbury's "middle way" and 
"calm virtues" derided courage and fear of death Alex- 
ander the Great, Cicero, Cato a character of an ideal 
companion for conversation which companions to be 
sought; which avoided further arguments against Shaftes- 
bury's benevolism and praise of sociableness true causes 
of sociableness in man: the multiplicity of his desires and 
the opposition encountered in gratifying them man in the 
golden age not impelled to create vast, thriving societies 
definition of society man in the wild state of nature 
growth of society from the wild state hypocrisy necessary 
in society a mercer and a young lady, his customer a 
country bumpkin in London importance of inventions and 
economic factors in history the role of imitation in in- 
creasing such necessities of life as coffee, tea, tobacco 
economic benefits of shipping and navigation economic 
importance of material decay, superannuation and acci- 
dental losses the value of the division of labor relativity 
of values conflict of interests and desires private vices 
may be turned into public benefits. 

Part II. From the Fourth Dialogue. On anger man eminently 189 
fit for society the causes of sociableness in man Hobbes 
accidental discoveries and improvements result from 
man's continuing quest for happiness the effect of man's 
prolonged childhood and youth upon man's sociableness 
man's sociableness not to be attributed to any natural love 
for his species the permanence and regularity of natural 
law, opposed to the slow, tentative growth of human 
knowledge complex causes of man's sociableness Locke 
sociableness not natural to the child, but acquired 
through education in society critique of Sir William Tem- 
ple's views on the early development of society. 



CONTENTS 

Pages 

From the Fifth Dialogue. The pineapple Genesis and early 205 
man how to account for modern savages as descendants 
of Noah society from primitive families origin of reli- 
gion: fear of mysterious causes precedes gratitude to God 
on Emperor Alexander Severus on Moses and monothe- 
ism notions of right and wrong not innate, but acquired 
on the obligations of children to their parents the birth of 
children, separated from conscious desire to improve soci- 
ety the irrational mystery of procreation the first step 
towards society: common danger from beasts of prey 
origin of fabulous creatures the lion's physical structure 
admirably suited to its purpose the lion in Paradise Lost 
freedom of the? will upheld man suffers more from man 
than from wild beasts wolves, boars the economy of 
nature in the succession of living beings the struggle for 
survival how fish multiply the importance of death in 
the economy of nature, or Providence war consistent with 
the divine plan nature replenishes the loss of males in the 
higher male birth-rate society's dependence upon menial 
labor God, the author of evil His purposes unfathom- 
able all races from the sons of Noah. 

From the Sixth Dialogue. The second step to society, the dan- 259 
ger men are in from one another the powerlessness of 
religion alone in enforcing human obligations contracts 
upheld more easily after the third step to society, the inven- 
tion of letters on the origin of language speech not 
primarily designed to make our thoughts known to others 
the span of time required to make a civilized society from 
those in the wild state slow accumulation of experience 
more important than individual genius in the growth of 
society but wars and disasters destroy arts and sciences 
more easily than buildings or inscriptions a final shot at 
Shaftesbury. 



THE 

FABLE OF THE BEES 



INTRODUCTION 



.MONO THE MASTERWORKS of Augustan England 
few can be said to anticipate our dilemmas of individual, 
social, economic and political morality more ably than Bernard 
Mandeville's Fable of the Bees. Much misunderstood by his 
Augustan contemporaries, many of whom declared his book perni- 
cious, Mandeville turned his physician's eye upon his society's 
health, and found that it thrived everywhere upon individual cor- 
ruptions. His analyses of the role of social ideals and personal 
impulses in human motivation are as stimulating today as they 
were in his time, and those who believe that the political morality 
of Machiavelli is still alive today cannot ignore the pungent social 
criticism of Mandeville, his kindred spirit. 

Born either in Dort or Rotterdam in 1670, Mandeville attended 
the University of Leyden and in 1691 took the degree of Doctor 
of Medicine, following in his father's footsteps. He later went to 
England to learn the language, married there in 1699, and lived 
in England until his death in 1733. In 1703 and 1704 he 
published some fables in the manner of La Fontaine, and a subse- 
quent fable, The Grumbling Hive: or, Knaves Turn'd Honest 
(1705), achieved popularity enough to be pirated. Some years 
later Mandeville called this poem "a story told in doggerel." Had 
it not been retained as the nucleus of The Fable of the Bees, it 
would never have achieved the fame which it earned as part of the 
amplified edition. 

1 



2 FABLE OF THE BEES 

The fable of The Grumbling Hive is quite transparent. The bees 
lived like men and performed all our actions "in small." The hive 
was naturally full of vice, "Yet the whole mass" was "a Paradise." 
Millions endeavored "to supply / Each other's lust and vanity" 
and hence the affluent society of Mandeville's time, and ours. The 
worst cheats in the hive were those who most vociferously com- 
plained of the dishonesty and fraud which infested their nation: 
". . . all the rogues cry'd brazenly, / Good gods, had we but 
honesty!" Jove, indignant, angrily rid the hive of fraud, but with 
remarkable results. The reign of honesty in the complex society of 
the hive turned out to be disastrous. As honesty triumphed over the 
common vices, pride and envy and all incentives to social and 
political emulation waned. The need for dozens of luxuries to 
gratify one's palate and passions diminished; hence industry and 
trade declined, and what was once a flourishing society founded 
upon a healthy and natural human selfishness soon became 
vulnerable to its enemies. Finally, after being decimated in battle, 
the remaining bees retreated into a hollow tree to lead temperate, 
frugal lives "Blest with content and honesty." Surrendering their 
vices, the bees also surrendered their progress in civilization. The 
moraL of the story is quite explicit: do not indulge the Utopian 
longing for a flourishing society free of vice; "... fools only strive 
/ To make a great an honest hive." 

When Mandeville's poem was republished as the basis of The 
Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices, Public k Benefits (1714), he 
explained in his Preface that the purpose of his amplified edition 
was to correct the misapprehensions of several readers who "either 
wilfully or ignorantly" misunderstood his poem and who imagined 
that it was a satire upon virtue and morality, composed entirely 
"for the encouragement of vice." The much-argued question of the 
purpose and intention of Mandeville's Fable plays a major part in 
the controversy which grew out of his repeated attacks upon the 
ethical benevolism of the third Earl of Shaftesbury. This con- 
troversy remained active throughout the eighteenth century and 
concerned not only the purpose but the very meaning of his 
doctrines. 

The 1714 edition of the Fable contained an important preface, 
the original poem, an essay entitled An Enquiry into the Origin of 
Moral Virtue, and twenty Remarks some of them full essays 



FABLE OF THE BEES 3 

which were prose expansions and interpretations of various lines in 
the poem. This edition seems not to have excited any public furor; 
that came when a later edition appeared in 1723, containing two 
further essays, An Essay on Charity and Charity-Schools and A 
Search into the Nature of Society. Mandeville's earlier editions 
certainly revealed his distaste for orthodox clerical opinion, but 
only with the 1723 edition, in which he disparaged the vulnerable 
institution of charity schools, did he elicit strong public disapproval 
from William Law and others. The Grand Jury of Middlesex, in 
fact, branded his book as a public nuisance. While Mandeville 
was earning his notorious reputation in the 1720's, he was busy 
composing the second volume of the Fable, consisting of a preface 
of six dialogues which further amplify and buttress his unorthodox 
views. This 1728 edition in two volumes is substantially the com- 
plete Fable as it has come down to us. 

Mandeville's doctrine is deceptively simple, and hence the 
unsuspecting reader who merely browses through the Fable might 
conclude that Mandeville's leitmotif private vices, public benefits 
sanctions indulgence in vice on the ground that such indulgence 
is, after all, unavoidable and socially useful. In the 1720's incensed 
moralists such as the anonymous author of "An Abusive Letter to 
Lord C." (which Mandeville reprinted in his Vindication at the 
close of volume I of the Fable) agreed that this ostensible carte 
blanche for the pursuit of vice was intolerable: 

. . . this profligate author of the Fable . . . has taken upon him 
to -tear up the very foundations of moral virtue, and establish 
vice in its room. The best physician in the world did never 
labour more, to purge the natural body of bad qualities, than 
this bumble-bee has done to purge the body-politic of good ones. 

It is to Mandeville's credit that while he stood up to such charges 
and retaliated, he did so rarely and never descended to the name- 
calling or coarser modes of controversy common in his times. 

Mandeville, in fact, took pains to reiterate his adherence to 
virtue and morality, to revelation, and to the Church of England. 
Morally respectable passages such as the following can be found 
throughout his writings: "I lay down as a first principle, that in all 
societies, great or small, it is the duty of every member of it to be 
good, that virtue ought to be encouraged, vice discountenanced, 



* FABLE OF THE BEES 

the laws obeyed, and transgressors punished." Is this not straight- 
forward? Seen from another point of view, however, Mandeville's 
professed faith in revelation and Christian ethics is supremely 
ironic. We cannot imagine him believing in a faith the ideals of 
which he so dexterously undermined. Professor F. B. Kaye, our 
ablest interpreter of Mandeville, admirably emphasizes this point: 

Mandeville's feeling is throughout anti-ascetic. He rejoices in 
destroying the ideals of those who imagine that there is in the 
world any real exemplification of the transcendent morality 
which he formally preaches. He is delighted to find that the 
rigoristic creed which he has adopted is an absolutely imprac- 
ticable one. 

Mandeville, then, dons the mask of irony, but he does not main- 
tain his pose consistently, as does Swift in his Modest Proposal. 
Modern writers on Mandeville, though generally suspicious of his 
sincerity in maintaining contradictory positions on morality and 
religion, regard his views on economics, psychology, and sociology 
as being more straightforward and literal. 

The reader who expects that Mandeville will always put his 
cards on the table and be honest or sincere is simply ignoring the 
fact that had Mandeville published his opinions without any hedg- 
ing whatever, he might not have avoided the prosecution and 
imprisonment to which freethinkers in his time were still subject. 
Discretion, for Mandeville, was indeed the better part of valor; he 
had no intention of suffering martyrdom of any sort for his cause. 
Bruno and Vanini, he remarked, "were both executed for openly 
professing and teaching of atheism." Shall we praise them for 
having the courage of their convictions? for being martyrs in the 
caues of freedom of speech? According to Mandeville, their self- 
sacrifice is merely an index of their pride: "There is no pitch of 
self-denial that a man of pride and constitution cannot reach, nor 
any passion so violent but he'll sacrifice it to another which is 
superior to it. . . ." 

One explanation for Mandeville's retreat behind irony, then, 
might be prudence, or his unwillingness to purchase his freedom 
of speech at the price of his liberty in society. Another explanation 
does Mandeville much more credit: to oppose the official morality 
derived from revelation is one thing, but to oppose that morality 



FABLE OF THE BEES 5 

while simultaneously professing to believe it is a maneuver that 
would attract far more attention and provoke many* a complacent 
conscience. His oblique and paradoxical remarks are thus both 
defensive and offensive, and are employed mischievously. 
He criticized the English clergy savagely for their worldliness, but 
always maintained his allegiance to the Church of England. Today, 
when parson-baiting is no longer a fashionable cause to the intel- 
lectual, we are less shocked at his open disrespect, or we may 
indeed enjoy it. 

As the immediacy of Mandeville's moralizing has waned, his 
literary vitality has come to be properly appreciated. The writer 
who was once regarded as a national menace is now praised in 
our literary histories as one of the more vigorous satirists of the 
age which produced Pope, Swift, Gay and "Martinus Scriblerus." 
Furthermore, Mandeville has also made his way into histories of 
philosophy, psychology, sociology and economics. His anticipa- 
tions of some modern ideas and approaches in the social sciences 
are striking, but before we turn to them let us first consider such 
difficulties of interpreting Mandeville's thesis as would trouble 
most readers. 

The difficulties in establishing what Mandeville meant begin in 
the very title of the Fable. He not only hides his intention and 
meaning in the contradictory halves of a paradox, but also renders 
them yet more elusive through intentional ambiguity. What rela- 
tionship actually exists between "private vices" and "public bene- 
fits"? The reader of the second edition in 1714 could not be 
censured for believing that Mandeville wished, for the benefit of 
society, to replace the virtues with the vices. If we judge from 
the title page of that edition, this is precisely the bait that we find: 
The Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices Publick Benefits. Contain- 
ing Several Discourses, to demonstrate, That Human Frailties, 
during the degeneracy of Mankind, may be turn'd to the Advantage 
of the Civil Society, and made to supply the Place of Moral Vir- 
tues. At the end of his Search into the Nature of Society (1723), 
Mandeville more cautiously concluded that "private vices, by the 
dexterous management of a skilful politician, may be turned into 
public benefits." This is a relatively guarded assertion, for Mande- 
ville surely realized that most readers would tend to insert "are" 
between "private vices" and "public benefits." 



6 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Commenting further on the meaning of his paradox, Mandeville 
noted that if his reading of the paradox were unacceptable, then 

... the worst construction that can be put upon the words is, 
that they are an epitome of what I have labored to prove 
throughout the book, that luxury and the vices of man, under 
the regulations and restrictions laid down in the Fable of the 
Bees, are subservient to, and even inseparable from the earthly 
felicity of the civil society; I mean what is commonly called 
temporal happiness, and esteemed to be such. 

A Letter to Dion (1732), p. 37. 

It is characteristic of Mandeville that only a page later he asserted 
that his "true reason" for citing the paradox in his title indeed, 
the only reason was to increase the sale of his book by stimu- 
lating the reader's curiosity! Mandeville's ambiguity led his con- 
temporary Francis Hutcheson to distinguish five ways in which 
Mandeville meant and applied his paradox: (1) "private vices are 
themselves public benefits," (2) "private vices naturally tend, 
as the direct and necessary means, to produce public happiness," 
(3) "private vices by dexterous management of governors may be 
made to tend to public happiness," (4) "private vices natively and 
necessarily flow from public happiness," and (5) "private vices 
will probably flow from public happiness through the present cor- 
ruption of men." A careful study of the Fable will convince one 
that Mandeville in fact actually uses all of these readings of his 
paradox, and perhaps a few others as well. 

As the omission of a specific verb in his paradox occasioned 
much criticism, so did his use of particular words, especially the 
words vice, virtue, and public benefit. Like many strict interpreters 
of religious morality, Mandeville reasoned that there can be no 
middle ground of neutral or indifferent acts. Whatever is not 
clearly virtuous is to be considered vicious, and nothing can be 
considered virtuous if it is in any way motivated by our self-regard. 
Kaye has named this ethical position "rigorism," and a few quo- 
tations will amply illustrate Mandeville's rigorism. In the Enquiry 
into the Origin of Moral Virtue we learn that "skilful politicians" 
agreed with their community to regard as vice "everything which, 
without regard to the public, man should commit to gratify any 
of his appetites"; and they gave the name of virtue "to every per- 



FABLE OF THE BEES 7 

formance by which man, contrary to the impulse of nature, should 
endeavor the benefit of others or the conquest of his own passions 
out of a rational ambition of being good." In 1732 Mandeville 
wrote that he had always "strenuously insisted . . . that no prac- 
tice, no action or good quality, how useful or beneficial soever they 
may be in themselves, can ever deserve the name of virtue, strictly 
speaking, where there is not a palpable self-denial to be seen.*' 
And further on in his Origin of Honour, "There is no virtue that 
has a name, but it curbs, regulates, or subdues some passion that 
is peculiar to human nature. . . ." Mandeville has obviously chosen 
an ethical standard to which only true ascetics can conform. Once 
this is recognized, the destructive power of his rigorous definition 
of virtue becomes clear. Virtue then becomes the property of the 
saintly, and Mandeville can exult in having shown how the gen- 
erality of men live and act under the dominion of vice. By his 
strict interpretation of virtue, he denies not the existence, but 
merely the presence of virtue in the lives of most men. Conse- 
quently, he is able to add to the catalogue of vices many moral 
traits that are commonly regarded as virtues. Chastity and humil- 
ity, for instance, become "vicious" to the extent that they bloat 
one's pride or self-esteem. Even charity, any benevolent public 
service whatever, could be traced to man's desire to think well of 
himself. 

In such instances Mandeville's paradox amounts to a denigra- 
tion of what most of us regard as virtuous behavior. But when 
he discusses the traditional or the "real" vices, he does not waste 
his words to convince us that they are indeed vicious; his aim on 
such occasions is to demonstrate that the vices, without exception, 
yield public benefits. Thus prostitution is beneficial to the public 
in that it diminishes the threat of the predatory male to the honor 
of chaste wives and maidens. In a separate essay entitled A Modest 
Defence of Publick Stews (1724), Mandeville used this argument 
to defend government-regulated prostitution. The fallacy of such 
reasoning is obvious, and Mandeville often admitted that in a 
great many instances the enormity of the crime or vice far ex- 
ceeded the social benefit it produced. His strategy in such cases 
was to insist upon the truism that some social good was the 
inevitable derivative of even the most heinous of crimes: "The 
worst of all the multitude /Did something for the common good." 



8 FABLE OF THE BEES 

The latter half of his paradox is construed more easily. By 
public benefits Mandeville meant any goods or good acts which 
are pleasurable or useful to any member of the public, apart from 
the individual agent. He was careful to point out, in his Letter to 
Dion, that he used these words in the sense which was current 
among most ordinary men: not the advantages of the City of 
God, not the salvation of souls in the afterlife, but all temporal and 
terrestrial goods or advantages whatever. In thus limiting his 
notion of public benefits, Mandeville was clearly answering the 
contention of the orthodox that the true public benefit awaits man 
in the afterlife. In the later nineteenth century J. M. Robertson, 
the editor of Shaftesbury's Characteristicks and author of a fine 
appreciation of Mandeville, subjected Mandeville's idea of public 
benefits to further attack, though from a position far removed from 
the religious orthodoxy of most of Mandeville's contemporary 
critics: 

For us to-day, the fallacy of Mandeville's thesis, in so far as 
that is expressed by his sub-title, lies not in the definition of vice, 
for which he was not specially responsible, but in his implied 
definition of "public benefits." What he really does is to show 
that the "vices" of some people work good to some other peo- 
ple: what he fails to define, and what he ought to define, is 
"public benefit." Everything there depends on what you under- 
stand by "public," and our answer to Mandeville may be stated 
very simply thus: That no benefit is a public benefit which 
involves the degradation of any. So long, of course, as we do 
not feel as a personal grievance the hardship of others, we shall 
tend to find Mandeville's demonstration either satisfactory or 
perplexing according as we are unprejudiced or biassed in 
favour of a transcendental ethic; but as soon as we attain the 
sense of the solidarity of society, and reason out the nature of 
the social interdependences, Mandeville's case becomes an ex- 
posure of social evil and a proof of the need for a reconstruc- 
tion. We do not deny that such "vices" involve such "benefit"; 
we say we want to have our benefits of a different kind. 

Essays towards a Critical Method 
(London, 1889), pp. 217-18. 

Mandeville's reply to this would probably have been con- 
ciliatory: we do indeed want to have our benefits of a different 



FABLE OF THE BEES 9 

kind; but (he would have added) I am merely pointing to those 
goods which most people daily regard as benefits. In his own way 
Robertson seems to have been driving toward a rigorous egali- 
tarian view of public benefit, much as Mandeville maintains a 
rigorous view of virtue. Yet Mandeville's theory of public benefit 
does deserve criticism, as Robertson and others felt. The point lies 
not, however, in his notion of the benefits but in his idea of the 
public. Mandeville's public, far from being democratic and egali- 
tarian, was rigidly hierarchical. One's class or position in the state 
was directly related to the kind and degree of public benefit to 
which one had access, or to which he was entitled. When Robert- 
son objected that we want our benefits to be of a different kind, 
he ought to have added that we also want our public to be different. 

Much of the strength of Mandeville's argument lies in the fact 
that he repeatedly claims to be dealing with the facts. In the fifth 
dialogue (Fable, Part II) Cleomenes, who defends the Fable and 
speaks for Mandeville, observes that "as all our knowledge comes 
a posteriori, it is imprudent to reason otherwise than from the 
facts." Throughout his Treatise of the Hypochondriack and Hys- 
terick Passions (1711) Mandeville recommends close and steady 
observation as the best means for diagnosing and treating a pa- 
tient. In his Fable he diagnoses the fundamental evils of society 
with zest, but refrains from offering major or drastic cures for 
the simple reason that society is in a sufficiently flourishing and 
healthy state. True, he did urge reforms of specific evils, as in his 
Enquiry into the Causes of the Frequent Executions at Tyburn 
(1725). In this work Mandeville attempted to improve the condi- 
tion the spiritual condition of the imprisoned; he also recom- 
mended in behalf of the medical profession that the corpses of 
the executed be donated to the advancement of science. He was 
not a sweeping reformer, not a sentimental humanitarian of the 
later-eighteenth-century kind. 

The foundation of Mandeville's critique of society is his view 
of human nature. Introducing the prose commentary upon his 
poem, he candidly asserts that ". . . without any compliment to 
the courteous reader, or myself, I believe man (besides skin, flesh, 
bones, &c. that are obvious to the eye) to be a compound of 
various passions; that all of them, as they are provoked and come 
uppermost, govern him by turns, whether he will or no." Human 



10 FABLE OF THE BEES 

nature, then, is founded initially on man's instinctive self-regard. 
We either indulge our passions directly or we skillfully disguise 
them, but our behavior is fundamentally based upon our overt or 
latent self-regard. Mandeville sharply limits the role of reason in 
determining or governing human behavior. Reason he regards as 
intimately allied with virtue; both provide the power of individual 
restraint and self-control. Mandeville would have agreed with 
Pope that 

Two Principles in human nature reign; 
Self-love to urge, and Reason, to restrain; 

but Pope did not ridicule man's pride in his reason as consistently 
as did Mandeville. Mandeville, in fact, came as close as any writer 
in the eighteenth century to anticipating the psychoanalytical de- 
valuation of the rational in human conduct. Like our depth psy- 
chologists, he was expert in recognizing such common "defense 
mechanisms" as rationalization and repression. In writing about 
the "hypochondriack" and "hysterick" passions he later referred 
to them as "diseases" he was clearly dealing with the neurotic 
personality of his time. He believed strongly that the gratification 
of ouc libidinal impulses is more beneficial to society than ascetic 
denial and self-mortification that is, whenever he was not paying 
lip-service to orthodoxy. 

His views on human psychology consist mainly in specific analy- 
ses of pride, shame, fear, envy, jealousy, avarice, prodigality, 
ambition, courage and other passions. Such cataloguing and de- 
scription in Mandeville seem to follow lines set down by Mon- 
taigne, Hobbes, Locke, Bayle and La Rochefoucauld, among 
others. What is new in Mandeville, or at least singularly accented, 
is his sense of a slowly developing, evolutionary social psychology. 
The student of Mandeville should be aware that his two major 
"historical" accounts of the origin of morals and society An 
Enquiry into the Origin of Moral Virtue and the Fifth Dialogue 
in the Fable, II are separated by a span of fourteen years and 
differ considerably. Mandeville begins the earlier account with 
the selfish savage in the primitive state of nature, and relates that 
he could not be made "tractable" (i.e., sociable and capable of self- 
improvement) unless he could be made to subordinate his private 
desires to the public interest. Unlike the social-contract theories 



FABLE OF THE BEES 1 1 

of the origin of society, Mandeville's theory attributes the initial 
step in the socialization of man to the egoistic impulses of "skilful 
politicians" who encouraged social intercourse not through any 
selfless love of their fellow creatures, but merely as a means to 
fulfill their selfish desires. Since it would have been impossible 
to reward the social behavior of the savage with a concrete gift 
for each virtuous act, they internalized the reward by flattering 
man upon the rationality of his soul and by inculcating the notions 
of honor as the highest good and shame as the worst of evils. By 
urging man's superiority to the animals and the indignity of grati- 
fying his brutish lusts, they established through flattery a code 
of ethical ideals which made social progress possible. Mandeville 
summarized this "process" in his much-quoted remark that "the 
moral virtues are the political offspring which flattery begot upon 
pride." 

Though many of Mandeville's critics took this sketch of the 
origin of moral virtue as a bona fide historical account, it is cer- 
tainly wiser to read this sketch not literally but as an allegory of the 
moral structure of civilized society. The speculations on the slow 
and gradual evolution of society which we find in the second 
volume of the Fable seem to have been designed to fulfill the 
expectation of a historical explanation of society, an expectation 
which had been raised in the editions prior to 1728. The history 
we are offered in the later dialogues is not chronological in the 
sense that specific dates are made available, but is rather of the 
kind of hypothetical or conjectural history of early society such 
as became increasingly popular later in that century. Mandeville 
tried to reconstruct the story of prehistoric society in accordance 
with empirical probability, as against revelation; his nearest ap- 
proach to chronology is no more than a series of three major 
"steps to society," followed by other important developments. The 
first stage occurred when savages were compelled by necessity to 
band together hi mutual defense against animals. "The second 
step to society," says Cleomenes, "is the danger men are in from 
one another: for which we are beholden to that staunch principle 
of pride and ambition that all men are born with." -And "the third 
and last step to society is the invention of letters," by which means 
laws would remain stable and trustworthy, rather than subject to 
the errors of oral tradition. Speech, of course, preceded the inven- 



12 FABLE OF THE BEES 

tion of letters. Mandeville's account of the gradual evolution of 
spoken language as a process in which the savage gropingly sought 
to supplement his insufficient gestures has been highly praised as 
one of the earliest ernpirical explanations of the origins of lan- 
guage. For reasons of prudence he does not deny the "inspira- 
tional" theory of language origins which divines demonstrated in 
Genesis; he merely offers his theory as an adjunct, as one of the 
ways in which language might have been rediscovered by the 
"fallen" savages. 

Other milestones of social evolution cited by Mandeville are 
the invention of weapons and tools, the use of iron, the division 
of labor, and the use of money. In the later seventeenth century 
these stages of development had been widely discussed and evalu- 
ated by all participants in the battle of the Ancients and the Mod- 
erns. In Mandeville's account they are set within a context that 
repeatedly stresses a slow, uncertain, not-quite-fortuitous evolu- 
tion of society during innumerable ages. When asked "how many 
ages do you think it would require to have a well-civilized nation 
from such a savage pair as yours?" Cleomenes replies, "That is 
very uncertain; and I believe it impossible to determine anything 
about it." In the mid-eighteenth century Buffon allegorized the 
six days of the Creation into an account of the procession of geo- 
logical ages, and later naturalists came to rely further on Nature 
as a reliable recorder of time. Lacking their insights into geological 
time, Mandeville was nevertheless more acutely aware than were 
his contemporaries of the immense stretches of time involved in 
the emergence of modern society. 

His later versions of the socialization of man did not cancel out 
but rather incorporated his earlier myth of the "skilful politicians." 
The later account is especially commendable for his reliance upon 
realistic "empirical" guesswork. He here regards society not as 
something that men agreed upon, a social contract, nor as a con- 
dition into which men were flattered by politicians. Society, rather, 
was forced upon them through various exigencies; it was their 
response to a challenge. Were we to add that society is hence one 
more natural occurrence in the stream of time, we would be com- 
plicating Mandeville's use of the terms "nature" and "natural." 
For Mandeville, society is an artifice through which men learned, 
and still learn, to regulate their impulses and instincts. The "natu- 



FABLE OF THE BEES 13 

ral" man is that bundle of irrational passions instincts, drives, 
desires, impulses and so forth which are innate in all men, 
everywhere and in all ages. Mandeville's natural man, we might 
say, is very much of a piece with the Freudian id, and whatever 
causes natural man to restrain his impulses, to deny the demands 
of his nature, is an "unnatural" or artificial socializing and "ra- 
tionalizing" of man. Only after the natural man was driven by 
necessity into social behavior did the crafty politicians encourage 
society in order to exploit it to their advantage. Mandeville did 
not want to surrender his earlier myth, but it is clearly unessen- 
tial in his revised account of social origins. Mandeville is more 
generally accurate when he reasons that the restraints upon natural 
man (i.e., upon the passions) are tolerable only because man 
learns that they insure a higher return of ease and happiness than 
he could attain without them. 

Mandeville's views on the growth of society reveal that he main- 
tained, as his contemporaries generally did, the conviction that 
the course of human history has been in the main progressive, the 
revolutions and declines of empire notwithstanding. But his attach- 
ment to progress was far removed from the quasi-religious senti- 
ment or inebriation which the idea of progress often inspired later 
in his century. The Godwins and Condorcets at the close of the 
century professed a "Salvationist" faith in secular progress and 
desired, in Carl Becker's terms, the heavenly city of the eighteenth- 
century philosophers. Their naive faith in the infinite perfectibility 
of man, a faith which even the optimists in Mandeville's day 
lacked, he would have thoroughly disparaged. And as for the pos- 
sibility of man's returning to a purer existence, Mandeville rele- 
gated all such tendencies toward primitivistic regression to the 
poets; no one in his right mind would be so foolish as to surrender 
the obvious advantages of present-day society. 

While speaking of the "salvationism" he disliked, let us also 
note that Mandeville's thought is often of the same mold as the 
Christianity he subverted. In order to discredit Christian ideals he 
tried to demonstrate that for all practical purposes they are inef- 
fective and even unreal. At the root of his evolutionary humanism, 
however, his Hobbesian image of natural man reminds us very 
much of the Calvinist image of depraved, fallen mankind. We can 
also find hi Mandeville's social thought the idea of social pre- 



14 FABLE OF THE BEES 

destination. In various passages Mandeville urges that the poor 
should remain poor, and that they ought not to be educated and 
thereby encouraged to transcend the class into which they were 
born. A complex society, he reasons, is necessarily dependent upon 
a class of poor workers who will relieve their betters of all menial 
tasks and drudgery. Nowhere does Mandeville entertain any belief 
in the natural equality of men. 

Such views were quite common in his time. On the question 
of ameliorating the lives of the poor as a class, Mandeville was 
merely taking a well-known conservative position which could be 
defended by the orthodox and the freethinkers alike. In a double- 
edged argument he asserts that the poor could be made very tract- 
able and docile if only their governors saw to it that they were 
well-instructed in religious faith. This tongue-in-cheek reasoning 
is but one more example of his early belief that religion is a 
political instrument that was managed by politicians for their own 
ends. 

Mandeville's unsentimental desire that the poor be kept in their 
condition of servitude, a condition he regarded as a prerequisite 
for a flourishing society, might suggest to us that he believed in a 
strongly regimented if not totalitarian state. But his preference in 
government is quite clear: he valued the English Settlement of 
1688 highly. The society of Augustan England he regarded as 
the best workable social system improvised by man, and for that 
reason he was a thorough conservative and reactionary on ques- 
tions of major social or political revision. From his conviction that 
human reason could not devise a better practicable society we are 
well prepared to understand his preference for a laissez-faire econ- 
omy over a state-regulated or mercantilist economy. While he did 
not discard the notion that the economic health of a nation was 
dependent upon a favorable balance of trade, he liked to believe 
that commerce would develop best and be most advantageous 
when it was free to follow its own lines of interest, adjusting sup- 
ply and demand as well as it could. "As things are managed with 
us," he wrote, "it would be preposterous to have as many brewers 
as there are bakers, or as many woolen-drapers as there are shoe- 
makers. This proportion as to numbers, in every trade, finds itself 
and is never better kept than when nobody meddles or interferes 
with it." 



FABLE OF THE BEES IS 

Mandeville not only anticipated the shift to laissez-faire eco- 
nomics which culminated in Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations 
(1776), but also maintained a criterion of value public utility, 
whatever contributes to the general happiness which became the 
foundation of Benthamite Utilitarianism hi the later eighteenth 
century. Bentham credited Joseph Priestley with the utilitarian prin- 
ciple of the greatest happiness for the greatest number, but it has 
also been found hi an earlier writer, Francis Hutcheson. Though 
in his general social thought Mandeville thinks of good as "public 
benefit," he does not really accept the greatest-happiness principle 
of the later utilitarians. Mandeville might have accepted a prin- 
ciple which read: the greatest happiness for the greatest number, 
in their degree or station. If his opinions on the poor sound 
harsh to us, we ought to recall that he was partially concerned 
to expose the numerous discrepancies between what public 
morality professed and how people in fact behaved. When we 
examine Hogarth's striking depictions of the disreputable poor, 
as in his "Gin Lane," or Mandeville's description of the uncouth 
mobs who accompanied the condemned to Tyburn, we can under- 
stand somewhat better the sentiments of aversion and disgust that 
the "mobility" inspired among the polite and educated. 

Of course, we admire Mandeville's candor, but we regret his 
inability, or his unwillingness, to think better of common human- 
ity. The view of human nature which he expressed in his Grum- 
bling Hive he held consistently for the next three decades. As 
the implications of The Grumbling Hive became clearer to him, 
he realized that his polemic had to be directed not only against 
the clergy but also against the ethical philosophy of Anthony Ash- 
ley Cooper, the third Earl of Shaftesbury. Though we have not 
elaborated upon this aspect of Mandeville's thought, we must note 
that had Mandeville no other claim to our attention, he would 
still retain historical importance as a major critic of Shaftesbury. 
Shaftesbury's principal work, his Character isticks of Men, Man- 
ners, Opinions, Times, etc. (1711) was, like Mandeville's Fable, 
a miscellany some parts of which had been published earlier. It is 
not unlikely that in the six dialogues of Part II of the Fable 
Mandeville might have been emulating the elegance of Shaftes- 
bury's dialogues. But there, except for some common assumptions 
they shared with their times, the resemblance ends. 



16 FABLE OF THE BEES 

While Mandeville had to withstand a volley of criticisms in the 
1720's, Shaftesbury's system was taken up by deists such as 
Hutcheson and, among the poets, especially by James Thomson, 
whose Seasons spread Shaftesbury's benevolism and nature philos- 
ophy to wherever English was read. Mandeville began to oppose 
Shaftesbury in the 1723 edition of the Fable and devoted much 
effort in the dialogues of the 1728 edition to further refutation. 
Horatio in these dialogues is a Shaftesburian whom Cleomenes, 
Mandeville's spokesman, converts to Mandeville's creed. The part- 
ing note of the Fable is Mandeville's summary evaluation of the 
case against Shaftesbury: 

... as, on the one hand, it must be confessed that his sentiments 
on liberty and humanity are noble and sublime, and that there 
is nothing trite or vulgar in the Characteristicks, so, on the 
other, it cannot be denied that the ideas he had formed of the 
goodness and excellency of our nature were as romantic and 
chimerical as they are beautiful and amiable. . . . 

What Mandeville disliked most in Shaftesbury's thought is its 
underlying and pervading faith in the natural goodness of man and 
in the ultimate goodness of the universe. He rejected Shaftesbury's 
view that harmonious, orderly society is the state of nature, a 
norm or terminal state into which the child develops. Shaftesbury's 
vaguely platonic transcendentalism; his faith in the platonic trinity 
of truth, beauty, and goodness; his belief that we have a "moral 
sense" by which we can intuitively or spontaneously distinguish 
good from evil, just as we distinguish between the beautiful and 
the ugly; his belief that virtue is its own reward and that (as Pope 
put it) "true Self-Love and Social are the same": these and many 
other tenets in Shaftesbury's system were all targets for Mande- 
ville. 

Their works and reputations gradually came to symbolize two 
fairly distinct ethical atmospheres. Shaftesbury's views, somewhat 
lofty or angelic, are directed toward an otherworldly Divine Mind; 
Mandeville's, rather earth-bound, perhaps demonic, are dedicated 
to the preservation and aggrandizement of national wealth and 
glory. Neither provides us with an ethic at once satisfying and 
practicable, but the moral predilections of each are still essen- 
tially vital, and conflicting, in our time. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 17 

Modem scholars have been much more attentive to Shaftesbury 
than to Mandeville, because Shaftesbury's Characteristicks exerted 
widespread European influence not only in morals, but also in 
aesthetics and in the nature-philosophies of the later eighteenth 
and early nineteenth centuries. Shaftesbury certainly deserves this 
attention, but if Mandeville has generated less discussion, we 
ought not to conclude that he is far less interesting to scholars 
or general readers. Mandeville is actually the much livelier and 
more stimulating of the two. Shaftesbury's appeal to the academi- 
cian is real enough, but turning to Mandeville from a reading of 
Shaftesbury is somewhat like meeting Rabelais after a session with 
Plato. Mandeville's sense of humor is not his least recommendation 
to the modern reader: 

Cleomenes: Set before your eyes a robust warrior that, having 
lost a limb in battle, is afterwards trampled upon 
by twenty horses; and tell me, pray, whether you 
think that lying thus helpless with most of his ribs 
broke and a fractured skull, in the agony of death 
for several hours, he suffers less than if a lion had 
dispatched him? 

Horatio: They are both very bad. 

We do, of course, agree, but we cannot help smiling at the under- 
statement: an experience which the reader may often expect in 
Mandeville's company. 

Irwin Primer 
Newark College of Rutgers University 



A NOTE ON THIS EDITION 



HE TEXT OF THIS edition is based upon that of 
the one- volume edition of the Fable which appeared in 1795. 
While spelling and punctuation have occasionally been altered for 
the needs of the general reader, the order of the words with a few 
exceptions that have been silently corrected remains unchanged. 
When particularly involved sentences resisted modernization, they 
were left in their original form in order to save their precise mean- 
ing. Those who wish to study Mandeville more thoroughly must 
certainly turn first to Professor F. B. Kaye's monumental edition 
of the Fable (two vols., Oxford, 1924; reprinted in 1957), which 
has been invaluable in the preparation of this popular edition. 

I here wish to thank my colleague Professor G. S. Alleman for 
his valuable criticism and advice relating to this edition. 



19 



SUGGESTED READINGS 

Paul B. Anderson, "Bernard Mandeville on Gin," PMLA, LIV (1934), 
775-84. 

Bonamy Dobree, Variety of Ways: Discussions of Six Authors, Oxford, 
1932. 

, (ed.), A Letter to Dion, by Bernard Mandeville, Liverpool, 

1954; another edition, ed. by Jacob Viner, Augustan Reprint 
Society, Ann Arbor, 1953. 

F. B. Kaye, "Mandeville on the Origin of Language," Modern Lan- 
guage Notes, XXXIX (1924), 136-142. 

, "The Influence of Bernard Mandeville," Studies in Philol- 
ogy, XIX (1922), 83-108 (reprinted in Studies in the Literature 
of the Augustan Age, ed. by R. C. Boys, Ann Arbor, 1952). 

, "The Writings of Bernard Mandeville: A Bibliographical Sur- 
vey," Journal of English and Germanic Philology, XX (Oct., 
1921), 419-467. 

-, "The Mandeville Canon: A Supplement," Notes and Queries, 



III, (May, 1924). 

Sterling P. Lamprecht, "The Fable of the Bees," Journal of Philosophy, 
XXIII (1926), 561-579. 

Arthur O. Lovejoy, Reflections on Human Nature, Baltimore, 1961. 

J. C. Maxwell, "Ethics and Politics in Mandeville," Philosophy, XXVI 
(1951). 

J. M. Robertson, Pioneer Humanists, London, 1907. (His essay on 
Mandeville was revised from its earlier form in his Essays 
towards a Critical Method, London, 1889.) 

A. K. Rogers, "The Ethics of Mandeville," International Journal of 
Ethics, XXXVI (1925), 1-17. 

LeRoy W. Smith, "Fielding and Mandeville: the 'War Against Vir- 
tue,'" Criticism, III, 1 (Winter, 1961), 7-15. 

Sir Leslie Stephen, History of English Thought in the Eighteenth Cen- 
tury, 1876; 3rd ed., 1902 (reprinted, N.Y., 1949), vol. II. 

N. Wilde, "Mandeville's Place in English Thought," Mind, VII (1898), 
219-232. 

Basil Willey, The Eighteenth Century Background: Studies on the Idea 
of Nature in the Thought of the Period, London, 1940, pp. 95- 
100. (A paperback reprint of this work, has been issued recently 
by the Beacon Press.) 

James D. Young, "Mandeville: A Popularizer of Hobbes," Modern 
Language Notes, LXXIV, 1 (Jan., 1959), 10-13. 

20 



[1714] 

PREFACE 



.LAWS AND GOVERNMENT are to the political 
bodies of civil societies what the vital spirits and life itself are to 
the natural bodies of animated creatures; and as those that study 
the anatomy of dead carcasses may see that the chief organs and 
nicest springs more immediately required to continue the motion 
of our machine are not hard bones, strong muscles and nerves, 
nor the smooth white skin that so beautifully covers them, but 
small trifling films and little pipes that are either overlooked or 
else seem inconsiderable to vulgar eyes; so they that examine into 
the nature of man, abstract from art and education, may observe 
that what renders him a sociable animal consists not in his desire 
of company, good nature, pity, affability, and other graces of a 
fair outside; but that his vilest and most hateful qualities are the 
most necessary accomplishments to fit him for the largest, and, 
according to the world, the happiest and most flourishing societies. 
The following Fable, in which what I have said is set forth at 
large, was printed above eight years ago* in a six penny pamphlet 
called The Grumbling Hive, or Knaves turn'd Honest; and being 
soon after pirated, cried about the streets in a halfpenny sheet. 
Since the first publishing of it, I have met with several that, either 
willfully or ignorantly mistaking the design, would have it that 
the scope of it was a satire upon virtue and morality and the 
whole wrote for the encouragement of vice. This made me resolve, 
whenever it should be reprinted, some way or other to inform the 



*[In 1705]. 

21 



22 FABLE OF THE BEES 

reader of the real intent this little poem was wrote with. I do not 
dignify these few loose lines with the name of Poem, that I would 
have the reader expect any poetry in them, but barely because they 
are rhyme, and I am hi reality puzzled what name to give them; 
for they are neither heroic nor pastoral, satire, burlesque, nor 
heroi-comic; to be a tale they want probability, and the whole 
is rather too long for a fable. All I can say of them is that they 
are a story told in doggerel, which, without the least design of 
being witty, I have endeavoured to do in as easy and familiar a 
manner as I was able: the reader shall be welcome to call them 
what he pleases. It was said of Montaigne that he was pretty well 
versed in the defects of mankind, but unacquainted with the ex- 
cellencies of human nature : if I fare no worse, I shall think myself 
well used. 

What country soever in the universe is to be understood by the 
Bee-Hive represented here, it is evident, from what is said of the 
laws and constitution of it, the glory, wealth, power, and industry 
of its inhabitants, that it must be a large, rich and warlike nation, 
that is happily governed by a limited monarchy. The satire, there- 
fore, to be met with in the following lines upon the several pro- 
fessions and callings and almost every degree and station of people 
was not* made to injure and point to particular persons, but only 
to show the vileness of the ingredients that altogether compose 
the wholesome mixture of a well-ordered society; in order to extol 
the wonderful power of political wisdom, by the help of which so 
beautiful a machine is raised from the most contemptible branches. 
For the main design of the Fable (as it is briefly explained in the 
Moral) is to show the impossibility of enjoying all the most elegant 
comforts of life that are to be met with in an industrious, wealthy 
and powerful nation, and at the same time, be blessed with all 
the virtue and innocence that can be wished for in a golden age; 
from thence to expose the unreasonableness and folly of those, 
that desirous of being an opulent and flourishing people and won- 
derfully greedy after all the benefits they can receive as such, are 
yet always murmuring at and exclaiming against those vices and 
inconveniences that from the beginning of the world to this present 
day have been inseparable from all kingdoms and states that ever 
were famed for strength, riches, and politeness, at the same tune. 

To do this, I first slightly touch upon some of the faults and 



FABLE OF THE BEES 23 

corruptions the several professions and callings are generally 
charged with. After that I show that those very vices of every 
particular person, by skillful management, were made subservient 
to the grandeur and worldly happiness of the whole. Lastly, by set- 
ting forth what of necessity must be the consequence of general 
honesty and virtue, and national temperance, innocence and con- 
tent, I demonstrate that if mankind could be cured of the failings 
they are naturally guilty of, they would cease to be capable of 
being raised into such vast potent and polite societies, as they have 
been under the several great commonwealths and monarchies that 
have flourished since the creation. 

If you ask me why I have done all this, cut bono? and what good 
these notions will produce? truly, besides the reader's diversion, 
I believe none at all; but if I was asked what naturally ought to 
be expected from them, I would answer that, in the first place, the 
people who continually find fault with others, by reading them, 
would be taught to look at home, and examining their own con- 
sciences, be made ashamed of always railing at what they are 
more or less guilty of themselves; and that, in the next, those who 
are so fond of the ease and comforts and reap all the benefits that 
are the consequence of a great and flourishing nation would learn 
more patiently to submit to those inconveniences, which no gov- 
ernment upon earth can remedy, when they should see the impos- 
sibility of enjoying any great share of the first, without partaking 
likewise of the latter. 

This, I say, ought naturally to be expected from the publishing 
of these notions, if people were to be made better by any thing 
that could be said to them; but mankind having for so many ages 
remained still the same, notwithstanding the many instructive 
and elaborate writings by which their amendment has been en- 
deavoured, I am not so vain as to hope for better success from 
so inconsiderable a trifle. 

Having allowed the small advantage this little whim is likely 
to produce, I think myself obliged to show that it cannot be 
prejudicial to any; for what is published, if it does no good, ought 
at least to do no harm: in order to this, I have made some explana- 
tory notes, to which the reader will find himself referred in those 
passages that seem to be most liable to exceptions. 

The censorious, that never saw the Grumbling Hive, will tell me 



24 FABLE OF THE BEES 

that whatever I may talk of the Fable, it not taking up a tenth 
part of the book, was only contrived to introduce the Remarks; 
that instead of clearing up the doubtful or obscure places, I have 
only pitched upon such as I had a mind to expatiate* upon; and 
that far from striving to extenuate the errors committed before, 
I have made bad worse, and shown myself a more barefaced cham- 
pion for vice in the rambling digressions than I had done in the 
Fable itself. 

I shall spend no time in answering these accusations: where men 
are prejudiced, the best apologies are lost; and I know that those 
who think it criminal to suppose a necessity of vice in any case 
whatever will never be reconciled to any part of the performance; 
but if this be thoroughly examined, all the offence it can give must 
result from the wrong inferences that may perhaps be drawn from 
it, and which I desire nobody to make. When I assert that vices 
are inseparable from great and potent societies, and that it is 
impossible their wealth and grandeur should subsist without, I do 
not say that the particular members of them who are guilty of any 
should not be continually reproved or not be punished for them 
when they grow into crimes. 

There are, I believe, few people in London, of those that are 
at any time forced to go a-foot, but what could wish the streets 
of it much cleaner than generally they are, while they regard 
nothing but their own clothes and private convenience; but when 
once they come to consider that what offends them is the result 
of the plenty, great traffic, and opulency of that mighty city, if 
they have any concern in its welfare, they will hardly ever wish to 
see the streets of it less dirty. For if we mind the materials of all 
sorts that must supply such an infinite number of trades and 
handicrafts as are always going forward; the vast quantity of vic- 
tuals, drink, and fuel that are daily consumed in it; the waste and 
superfluities that must be produced from them; the multitudes of 
horses and other cattle that are always dawbing the streets; the 
carts, coaches, and more heavy carriages that are perpetually wear- 
ing and breaking the pavement of them; and, above all, the num- 
berless swarms of people that are continually harassing and tram- 
pling through every part of them: If, I say, we mind all these, we 
shall find that every moment must produce new filth; and, con- 
sidering how far distant the great streets are from the river side, 



FABLE OF THE BEES 25 

what cost and care soever be bestowed to remove the nastiness 
almost as fast as it is made, it is impossible London should be 
more cleanly before it is less flourishing. Now would I ask, if a 
good citizen, in consideration of what has been said, might not 
assert, that dirty streets are a necessary evil, inseparable from 
the felicity of London, without being the least hinderance to the 
cleaning of shoes, or sweeping of streets, and consequently without 
any prejudice either to the blackguard or the scavingers. 

But if, without any regard to the interest or happiness of the 
city, the question was put, What place I thought most pleasant to 
walk in? Nobody can doubt, but before the stinking streets of 
London, I would esteem a fragrant garden or a shady grove in 
the country. In the same manner, if laying aside all worldly great- 
ness and vain glory, I should be asked where I thought it was most 
probable that men might enjoy true happiness, I would prefer a 
small peaceable society, in which men, neither envied nor es- 
teemed by neighbours, should be contented to live upon the natu- 
ral product of the spot they inhabit, to a vast multitude abounding 
in wealth and power that should always be conquering others by 
their arms abroad and debauching themselves by foreign luxury at 
home. 

Thus much I had said to the reader in the first edition and have 
added nothing by way of preface in the second. But since that, a 
violent outcry has been made against the book, exactly answering 
the expectation I always had of the justice, the wisdom, the charity, 
and fair dealing of those whose good will I despaired of. It has 
been presented by the Grand Jury and condemned by thousands 
who never saw a word of it. It has been preached against before 
my Lord Mayor; and an utter refutation of it is daily expected 
from a reverend divine, who has called me names in the adver- 
tisements and threatened to answer me in two months time for 
above five months together. What I have to say for myself, the 
reader will see in my Vindication at the end of the book, where 
he will likewise find the Grand Jury's Presentment and a letter to 
the Right Honourable Lord C* which is very rhetorical beyond 
argument or connection. The author shows a fine talent for invec- 
tives and great sagacity in discovering atheism, where others can 



* Not in this edition. 



26 FABLE OF THE BEES 

find none. He is zealous against wicked books, points at the Fable 
of the Bees, and is very angry with the author. He bestows four 
strong epithets on the enormity of his guilt, and by several elegant 
innuendos to the multitude, as the danger there is in suffering such 
authors to live and the vengeance of Heaven upon a whole nation, 
very charitably recommends him to their care. 

Considering the length of this epistle and that it is not wholly 
levelled at me only, I thought at first to have made some extracts 
from it of what related to myself; but finding, on a nearer inquiry, 
that what concerned me was so blended and interwoven with what 
did not, I was obliged to trouble the reader with it entire, not 
without hopes that, prolix as it is, the extravagancy of it will be 
entertaining to those who have perused the treatise it condemns 
with so much horror. 



[1705] 
THE 

GRUMBLING HIVE: 

OR, 

KNAVES TURN'D HONEST. 



A spacious hive well stock'd with bees, 

That liv'd in luxury and ease; 

And yet as fam'd for laws and arms, 

As yielding large and early swarms; 

Was counted the great nursery 

Of sciences and industry. 

No bees had better government, 

More fickleness, or less content: 

They were not slaves to tyranny, 

Nor rul'd by wild democracy; 10 

But kings, that could not wrong, because 

Their power was circumscrib'd by laws. 

These insects liv'd like men, and all 
Our actions they perform'd in small: 
They did whatever's done in town, 
And what belongs to sword or gown; 
Though th' artful works, by nimble slight 
Of minute limbs, 'scap'd human sight; 
Yet we've no engines, labourers, 
Ships, castles, arms, artificers, 20 

Craft, science, shop, or instrument, 
But they had an equivalent: 
Which, since their language is unknown, 

27 



28 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Must be call'd, as we do our own. 

As grant, that among other things, 

They wanted dice, yet they had kings; 

And those had guards; from whence we may 

Justly conclude, they had some play; 

Unless a regiment be shown 

Of soldiers, that make use of none. 30 

Vast numbers throng'd the fruitful hive; 
Yet those vast numbers made 'em thrive; 
Millions endeavouring to supply 
Each other's lust and vanity; 
While other millions were employ'd, 
To see their handy-works destroy'd; 
They furnish'd half the universe; 
Yet had more work than labourers. 
Some with vast stocks, and little pains, 
Jump'd into business of great gams; 40 

And some were damn'd to scythes and spades, 
And all those hard laborious trades; 
Where willing wretches daily sweat, 
And wear out strength and limbs to eat: 
While others follow'd mysteries, 
To which few folks binds 'prentices; 
That want no stock, but that of brass, 
And may set up without a cross; 
As sharpers, parasites, pimps, players, 
Pickpockets, coiners, quacks, southsayers, 50 

And all those, that in enmity, 
With downright working, cunningly 
Convert to their own use the labour 
Of their good-natur'd heedless neighbour. 
These were call'd Knaves, but bar the name, 
The grave industrious were the same: 
All trades and places knew some cheat, 
No calling was without deceit. 

The lawyers, of whose art the basis 
Was raising feuds and splitting cases, 60 

Oppos'd all registers, that cheats 
Might make more work with dipt estates; 



FABLE OF THE BEES 29 

As were't unlawful, that one's own, 

Without a law-suit, should be known. 

They kept off hearings wilfully, 

To finger the refreshing fee; 

And to defend a wicked cause, 

Examin'd and survey'd the laws, 

As burglars shops and houses do, 

To find out where they'd best break through. 70 

Physicians valu'd fame and wealth 
Above the drooping patient's health, 
Or their own skill: the greatest part 
Study'd, instead of rules of art, 
Graye pensive looks and dull behaviour, 
To gain th' apothecary's favour; 
The praise of midwives, priests, and all 
That serv'd at birth or funeral. 
To bear with th' ever-talking tribe, 
And hear my lady's aunt prescribe; 80 

With formal smile, and kind how d'ye, 
To fawn on all the family; 
And, which of all the greatest curse is, 
T' endure th' impertinence of nurses. 

Among the many priests of Jove, 
Hir'd to draw blessings from above, 
Some few were learn'd and eloquent, 
But thousands hot and ignorant: 
Yet all pass'd muster that could hide 
Their sloth, lust, avarice and pride; 90 

For which they were as fam'd as tailors 
For cabbage, or for brandy sailors, 
Some, meagre-look'd, and meanly clad, 
Would mystically pray for bread, 
Meaning by that an ample store, 
Yet lit'rally received no more; 
And, while these holy drudges starv'd, 
The lazy ones, for which they serv'd, 
Indulg'd their ease, with all the graces 
Of health and plenty hi their faces. 100 

The soldiers, that were forc'd to fight. 



30 FABLE OF THE BEES 

If they surviv'd, got honour by't; 

Though some, that shunn'd the bloody fray, 

Had limbs shot off, that ran away: 

Some valiant gen'rals fought the foe; 

Others took bribes to let them go: 

Some ventur'd always where 'twas warm, 

Lost now a leg, and then an arm; 

Till quite disabled, and put by, 

They liv'd on half their salary; 110 

While others never came in play, 

And staid at home for double pay. 

Their kings were serv'd, but knavishly, 
Cheated by their own ministry; 
Many, that for their welfare slaved, 
Robbing the very crown they saved: 
Pensions were small, and they liv'd high, 
Yet boasted of their honesty. 
Calling, whene'er they strain'd their right, 
The slipp'ry trick a perquisite; 120 

And when folks understood their cant, 
They chang'd that for emolument; 
Unwilling to be short or plain, 
In any thing concerning gain; 
For their was not a bee but would 
Get more, I won't say, than he should; 
But than he dar'd to let them know, 
That pay'd for't; as your gamesters do, 
That, though at fair play, ne'er will own 
Before the losers that they've won. 130 

But who can all their frauds repeat? 
The very stuff which in the street 
They sold for dirt t' enrich the ground, 
Was often by the buyers found 
Sophisticated with a quarter 
Of good-for-nothing stones and mortar; 
Though Flail had little cause to mutter, 
Who sold the other salt for butter. 

Justice herself, fam'd for fair dealing, 
By blindness had not lost her feeling; 140 



FABLE OF THE BEES 31 

Her left hand, which the scales should hold, 

Had often dropt 'em, brib'd with gold; 

And, though she seem'd impartial, 

Where punishment was corporal, 

Pretended to a reg'lar course, 

In murder, and all crimes of force; 

Though some first pillory'd for cheating, 

Were hang'd in hemp of their own beating; 

Yet, it was thought, the sword she bore 

Check'd but the desp'rate and the poor; 150 

That, urg'd by mere necessity, 

Were ty'd up to the wretched tree 

For crimes, which not deserv'd that fate, 

But to secure the rich and great. 

Thus every part was full of vice, 
Yet the whole mass a paradise; 
Flatter'd in peace, and fear'd in wars 
They were th' esteem of foreigners, 
And lavish of their wealth and lives, 
The balance of all other hives. 160 

Such were the blessings of that state; 
Their crimes conspir'd to make them great: 
And virtue, who from politics 
Has learn'd a thousand cunning tricks, 
Was, by their happy influence, 
Made friends with vice: And ever since, 
The worst of all the multitude 
Did something for the common good. 

This was the state's craft, that maintain'd 
The whole of which each part complain'd: 170 

This, as in music harmony 
Made j airings in the main agree, 
Parties directly opposite, 
Assist each other, as 'twere for spite; 
And temp'rance with sobriety, 
Serve drunkenness and gluttony. 

The root of evil, avarice, 
That dam'd ill-natur'd baneful vice, 
Was slave to prodigality, 



32 FABLE OF THE BEES 

That noble sin; whilst luxury 180 

Employ'd a million of the poor, 

And odious pride a million more: 

Envy itself, and vanity, 

Were ministers of industry; 

Their darling folly, fickleness, 

In diet, furniture, and dress, 

That strange ridic'lous vice, was made 

The very wheel that turn'd the trade. 

Their laws and clothes were equally 

Objects of mutability! 190 

For, what was well done for a time, 

In half a year became a crime; 

Yet while they alter'd thus their laws, 

Still finding and correcting flaws, 

They mended by inconstancy 

Faults, which no prudence could foresee. 

Thus vice nurs'd ingenuity, 
Which join'd with time and industry, 
Had carry'd life's conveniences, 

Its real pleasures, comforts, ease, 200 

To such a height, the very poor 
Liv'd better than the rich before. 
And nothing could be added more. 

How vain is mortal happiness! 
Had they but known the bounds of bliss; 
And that perfection here below 
Is more than gods can well bestow; 
The grumbling brutes had been content 
With ministers and government. 

But they, at every ill success, 210 

Like creatures lost without redress, 
Curs'd politicians, armies, fleets; 
While every one cry'd, damn the cheats, 
And would, though conscious of his own, 
In others barb'rously bear none. 

One, that had got a princely store, 
By cheating master, king, and poor, 
Dar'd cry aloud, the land must sink 



FABLE OF THE BEES 33 

For all its fraud; and whom d'ye think 

The sermonizing rascal chid? 220 

A glover that sold lamb for kid. 

The least thing was not done amiss, 
Or cross'd the public business; 
But all the rogues cry'd brazenly, 
Good gods, had we but honesty! 
Merc'ry smil'd at th' impudence, 
And others call'd it want of sense, 
Always to rail at what they lov'd: 
But Jove with indignation mov'd, 
At last in anger swore, he'd rid 230 

The bawling hive of fraud; and did. 
The very moment it departs, 
And honesty fills all their hearts; 
There shows 'em, like th' instructive tree, 
Those crimes which they're asham'd to see; 
Which now in silence they confess, 
By blushing at their ugliness: 
Like children, that would hide their faults, 
And by their colour own their thoughts : 
Imag'ning, when they're look'd upon, 240 

That others see what they have done. 

But, O ye gods! what consternation, 
How vast and sudden was th' alteration! 
In half an hour, the nation round, 
Meat fell a penny in the pound. 
The mask hypocrisy's flung down, 
From the great stateman to the clown: 
And some in borrow'd looks well known, 
Appear'd like strangers in their own. 
The bar was silent from that day; 250 

For now the willing debtors pay, 
Ev'n what's by creditors forgot; 
Who quitted them that had it not. 
Those that were in the wrong, stood mute, 
And dropt the patch'd vexatious suit: 
On which since nothing less can thrive, 
Than lawyers in an honest hive, 



34 FABLE OF THE BEES 

All, except those that got enough, 
With inkhorns by their sides troop'd oft. 

Justice hang'd some, set others free; 260 

And after gaol delivery, 
Her presence being no more requir'd, 
With all her train and pomp retir'd. 
First march'd some smiths with locks and grates, 
Fetters, and doors with iron plates: 
Next gaolers, turnkeys and assistants: 
Before the goddess, at some distance, 
Her chief and faithful minister, 
'Squire Catch,* the law's great finisher, 
Bore not th' imaginary sword, 270 

But his own tools, an ax and cord: 
Then on a cloud the hood-wink'd fair, 
Justice herself was push'd by air: 
About her chariot, and behind, 
Were Serjeants, bumsf of every kind, 
Tip-staffs, and all those officers, 
That squeeze a living out of tears. 

Though physic liv'd, while folks were ill, 
None would prescribe, but bees of skill, 
Which through the hive dispers'd so wide, 280 

That none of them had need to ride; 
Wav'd vain disputes, and strove to free 
The patients of their misery; 
Left drugs in cheating countries grown, 
And us'd the product of their own; 
Knowing the gods sent no disease, 
To nations without remedies. 

Their clergy rous'd from laziness, 
Laid not their charge on journey-bees; 
But serv'd themselves, exempt from vice, 290 

The gods with pray'r and sacrifice; 
All those, that were unfit, or knew, 
Their service might be spar'd, withdrew: 



*Jack Ketch, the generic nickname for the hangman. 
+bums bumbailiffs, officers of the lowest degree. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 35 

Nor was here business for so many, 

(If th' honest stand in need of any,) 

Few only with the high-priest staid, 

To whom the rest obedience paid: 

Himself employed in holy cares, 

Resign'd to others state-affairs. 

He chas'd no starv'ling from his door, 300 

Nor pinch'd the wages of the poor: 

But at his house the hungry's fed, 

The hireling finds unmeasured bread, 

The needy traveler board and bed. 

Among the king's great ministers, 
And all th 1 inferior officers, 
The change was great; for frugally 
They now liv'd on their salary: 
That a poor bee should ten times come 
To ask his due, a trifling sum, 310 

And by some well-hir'd clerk be made 
To give a crown, or ne'er be paid, 
Would now be calFd a downright cheat, 
Though formerly a perquisite. 
All places manag'd first by three, 
Who watch'd each other's knavery 
And often for a fellow-feeling, 
Promoted one another's stealing, 
Are happily supply'd by one, 
By which some thousands more are gone. 320 

No honour now could be content, 
To live and owe for what was spent; 
Liv'ries in brokers shops are hung, 
They part with coaches for a song; 
Sell stately horses by whole sets; 
And country-houses, to pay debts. 

Vain cost is shunn'd as much as fraud; 
They have no forces kept abroad; 
Laugh at th' esteem of foreigners, 
And empty glory got by wars; 330 

They fight but for their country's sake, 
When right or liberty's at stake. 



36 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Now mind the glorious hive, and see 
How honesty and trade agree. 
The show is gone, it thins apace; 
And looks with quite another face. 
For 'twas not only that they went, 
By whom vast sums were yearly spent; 
But multitudes that liv'd on them, 
Were daily forc'd to do the same. 340 

In vain to other trades they'd fly; 
All were o'er-stock'd accordingly. 

The price of land and houses falls; 
Mirac'lous palaces, whose walls, 
Like those of Thebes, were rais'd by play,t 
Are to be let; while the once gay, 
Well-seated household gods would be 
More pleas'd to expire in flames, than see 
The mean inscription on the door 
Smile at the lofty ones they bore. 350 

The building trade is quite destroy'd, 
Artificers are not employ'd; 
No limner for his art is fam'd, 
* Stone-cutters, carvers are not nam'd. 

Those, that remain'd, grown temp'rate, strive 
Not how to spend, but how to live; 
And, when they paid their tavern score, 
Resolv'd to enter it no more: 
No vintner's jilt in all the hive 

Could wear now cloth of gold, and thrive; 360 

Nor Torcol* such vast sums advance, 
For Burgundy and Ortolans; 
The courtier's gone that with his miss 
Supp'd at his house on Christmas peas; 



allusion to the legend that the walls of the Thebes arose to the 
music of Amphion. This passage suggests that play refers not only 
to music, but also to gambling. 

* Torcol a character in Edward Ravenscroft's Restoration comedy, 
The English Lawyer (1678), based upon George Ruggle's famous 
Latin comedy, Ignoramus, which had been performed before King 
James I in 1615. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 37 

Spending as much in two hours stay, 
As keeps a troop of horse a day. 

The haughty Chloe, to live great, 
Had made her husband rob the state: 
But now she sells her furniture, 
Which th' Indies had been ransack'd for; 370 

Contracts th' expensive bill of fare, 
And wears her strong suit a whole year: 
The slight and fickle age is past; 
And clothes, as well as fashions, last. 
Weavers, that join'd rich silk with plate, 
And all the trades subordinate, 
Are. gone; still peace and plenty reign, 
And every thing is cheap, though plain: 
Kind nature, free from gard'ners force, 
Allows all fruits in her own course; 380 

But rarities cannot be had, 
Where pains to get them are not paid. 

As pride and luxury decrease, 
So by degrees they leave the seas. 
Not merchants now, but companies 
Remove whole manufactories. 
All arts and crafts neglected lie; 
Content, the bane of industry, 
Makes 'em admire their homely store, 
And neither seek nor covet more. 390 

So few in the vast hive remain, 
The hundredth part they can't maintain 
Against th' insults of numerous foes; 
Whom yet they valiantly oppose: 
'Till some well fenc'd retreat is found, 
And here they die or stand their ground. 
No hireling in their army's known; 
But bravely fighting for their own, 
Their courage and integrity 
At last were crown'd with victory. 400 

They triumph'd not without their cost, 
For many thousand bees were lost. 
Harden'd with toils and exercise, 



38 FABLE OF THE BEES 

They counted ease itself a vice; 
Which so improv'd their temperance; 
That, to avoid extravagance, 
They flew into a hollow tree, 
Blest with content and honesty. 



THE MORAL. 



Then leave complaints: fools only strive 

To make a great an honest hive. 410 

T' enjoy the world's conveniences, 

Be fam'd in war, yet live in ease, 

Without great vices, is a vain 

Eutopia seated in the brain. 

Fraud, luxury, and pride must live, 

While we the benefits receive: 

Hunger's a dreadful plague, no doubt, 

Yet who digests or thrives without? 

Do we not owe the growth of wine 

To the dry shabby crooked vine? 420 

Which, while its shoots neglected stood, 

Chok'd other plants, and ran to wood; 

But blest us with its noble fruit, 

As soon as it was ty'd and cut: 

So vice is beneficial found, 

When it's by justice lopp'd and bound; 

Nay, where the people would be great, 

As necessary to the state, 

As hunger is to make 'em eat. 

Bare virtue can't make nations live 430 

In splendor; they, that would revive 

A golden age, must be as free, 

For acorns as for honesty. 



[1714] 
THE 

INTRODUCTION. 



OF THE GREATEST reasons why so few people 
understand themselves, is, that most writers are always teaching 
men what they should be, and hardly ever trouble their heads with 
telling them what they really are. As for my part, without any 
compliment to the courteous reader, or myself, I believe man (be- 
sides skin, flesh, bones, &c. that are obvious to the eye) to be a 
compound of various passions; that all of them, as they are pro- 
voked and come uppermost, govern him by turns, whether he will 
or no. To show that these qualifications, which we all pretend to 
be ashamed of, are the great support of a flourishing society, has 
been the subject of the foregoing poem. But there being some pas- 
sages in it seemingly paradoxical, I have in the preface promised 
some explanatory remarks on it; which, to render more useful, I 
have thought fit to inquire, how man, no better qualified, might 
yet by his own imperfections be taught to distinguish between vir- 
ture and vice: and here I must desire the reader once for all to 
take notice, that when I say men, I mean neither Jews nor Chris- 
tians; but mere man, hi the state of nature and ignorance of the 
true Deity. 



39 



[1714] 

AN 

INQUIRY 

INTO THE 

ORIGIN OF MORAL VIRTUE. 



XL UNTAUGHT ANIMALS are only solicitous of 
pleasing themselves and naturally follow the bent of their own 
inclinations, without considering the good or harm that, from 
their being pleased, will accrue to others. This is the reason that, 
in the wild state of nature, those creatures are fittest to live peace- 
ably together in great numbers, that discover the least of 
understanding and have the fewest appetities to gratify; and 
consequently no species of animals is, without the curb of gov- 
ernment, less capable of agreeing long together in multitudes than 
that of man; yet such are his qualities, whether good or bad I 
shall not determine, that no creature besides himself can ever be 
made sociable: but being an extraordinary selfish and headstrong, 
as well as cunning animal, however he may be subdued by superior 
strength, it is impossible by force alone to make him tractable, and 
receive the improvements he is capable of. 

The chief thing, therefore, which lawgivers and other wise men 
that have laboured for the establishment of society have en- 
deavoured, has been to make the people they were to govern 
believe that it was more beneficial for everybody to conquer than 
indulge his appetites, and much better to mind the public than 

41 



42 FABLE OF THE BEES 

what seemed his private interest. As this has always been a very 
difficult task, so no wit or eloquence has been left untried to com- 
pass it; and the moralists and philosophers of all ages employed 
their utmost skill to prove the truth of so useful an assertion. But 
whether mankind would have ever believed it or not, it is not 
likely that anybody could have persuaded them to disapprove of 
their natural inclinations or prefer the good of others to their 
own, if, at the same time, he had not showed them an equivalent 
to be enjoyed as a reward for the violence, which, by so doing, 
they of necessity must commit upon themselves. Those that have 
undertaken to civilize mankind were not ignorant of this; but being 
unable to give so many real rewards as would satisfy all persons 
for every individual action, they were forced to contrive an 
imaginary one, that, as a general equivalent for the trouble of self- 
denial, should serve on all occasions, and without costing any 
thing either to themselves or others, be yet a most acceptable 
recompense to the receivers. 

They thoroughly examined all the strength and frailities of our 
nature, and observing that none were either so savage as not to 
be charmed with praise, or so despicable as patiently to bear con- 
tempt, justly concluded that flattery must be the most powerful 
argument that could be used to human creatures. Making use of 
this bewitching engine, they extolled the excellency of our nature 
above other animals, and setting forth with unbounded praises the 
wonders of our sagacity and vastness of understanding, bestowed 
a thousand encomiums on the rationality of our souls, by the help 
of which we were capable of performing the most noble achieve- 
ments. Having, by this artful way of flattery, insinuated themselves 
into the hearts of men, they began to instruct them in the notions 
of honour and shame; representing the one as the worst of all evils, 
and the other as the highest good to which mortals could aspire: 
which being done, they laid before them how unbecoming it was 
the dignity of such sublime creatures to be solicitous about grati- 
fying their appetites, which they had in common with brutes, and 
at the same time unmindful of those higher qualities that gave 
them the preeminence over all visible beings. They indeed con- 
fessed, that those impulses of nature were very pressing; that it 
was troublesome to resist, and very difficult wholly to subdue 
them. But this they only used as an argument to demonstrate how 



FABLE OF THE BEES 43 

glorious the conquest of them was on the one hand and how 
scandalous on the other not to attempt it. 

To introduce, moreover, an emulation amongst men, they di- 
vided the whole species into two classes, vastly differing from 
one another: the one consisted of abject, low-minded people, that 
always hunting after immediate enjoyment, were wholly incapable 
of self-denial, and without regard to the good of others, had no 
higher aim than their private advantage; such as being enslaved 
by voluptuousness, yielded without resistance to every gross desire, 
and made no use of their rational faculties but to heighten their 
sensual pleasure. These wild grovelling wretches, they said, were 
the dross of their kind, and having only the shape of men, dif- 
fered from brutes in nothing but their outward figure. But the 
other class was made up of lofty high-spirited creatures, that free 
from sordid selfishness, esteemed the improvements of the mind 
to be their fairest possessions; and, setting a true value upon 
themselves, took no delight but in embellishing that part in which 
their excellency consisted; such as despising whatever they had 
in common with irrational creatures, opposed by the help of reason 
their most violent inclinations; and making a continual war with 
themselves, to promote the peace of others, aimed at no less than 
the public welfare and the conquest of their own passion. 

Fortior est qui se quam qui fortissima Vincit 
Moenia . . .* 

These they called the true representatives of their sublime species, 
exceeding in worth the first class by more degrees than that itself 
was superior to the beasts of the field. 

As in all animals that are not too imperfect to discover pride, 
we find that the finest and such as are the most beautiful and valu- 
able of their kind have generally the greatest share of it; so in man, 
the most perfect of animals, it is so inseparable from his very 
essence (how cunningly soever some may learn to hide or dis- 
guise it) that without it the compound he is made of would want 
one of the chief est ingredients; which, if we consider, it is hardly 



*Stronger is the man who conquers himself than he who conquers 
the strongest cities. Mandeville's Latin closely resembles that in the 
Vulgate text of Proverbs, 16:32. 



44 FABLE OF THE BEES 

to be doubted but lessons and remonstrances, so skilfully adapted 
to the good opinion man has of himself as those I have mentioned, 
must, if scattered amongst a multitude, not only gain the assent 
of most of them as to the speculative part, but likewise induce 
several, especially the fiercest, most resolute, and best among them 
to endure a thousand inconveniences and undergo as many hard- 
ships, that they may have the pleasure of counting themselves men 
of the second class and consequently appropriating to themselves 
all the excellencies they have heard of it. 

From what has been said, we ought to expect, in the first place, 
that the heroes who took such extraordinary pains to master some 
of their natural appetites and preferred the good of others to any 
visible interest of their own would not recede an inch from the 
fine notions they had received concerning the dignity of rational 
creatures; and having ever the authority of the government on 
their side, with all imaginable vigour assert the esteem that was 
due to those of the second class, as well as their superiority over 
the rest of their kind. In the second, that those who wanted a 
sufficient stock of either pride or resolution to buoy them up in 
mortifying of what was dearest to them, followed the sensual dic- 
tates of nature, would yet be ashamed of confessing themselves to 
be those 'despicable wretches that belonged to the inferior class 
and were generally reckoned to be so little removed from brutes; 
and that therefore, in their own defence, they would say as others 
did, and hiding their own imperfections as well as they could, 
cry up self-denial and public spiritedness as much as any: for it 
is highly probable, that some of them, convinced by the real proofs 
of fortitude and self-conquest they had seen, would admire in 
others what they found wanting in themselves, others be afraid of 
the resolution and prowess of those of the second class, and that 
all of them were kept in awe by the power of their rulers; where- 
fore it is reasonable to think, that none of them (whatever they 
thought in themselves) would dare openly contradict what by 
everybody else was thought criminal to doubt of. 

This was (or at least might have been) the manner after which 
savage man was broke; from whence it is evident, that the first 
rudiments of morality broached by skilful politicians to render 
men useful to each other, as well as tractable, were chiefly con- 
trived, that the ambitious might reap the more benefit from and 



FABLE OF THE BEES 45 

govern vast numbers of them with the greater ease and security. 
This foundation of politics being once laid, it is impossible that 
man should long remain uncivilized: for even those who only 
strove to gratify their appetites, being continually crossed by 
others of the same stamp, could not but observe, that whenever 
they checked their inclinations or but followed them with more 
circumspection, they avoided a world of troubles and often escaped 
many of the calamities that generally attended the too eager pur- 
suit after pleasure. 

First, they received, as well as others, the benefit of those ac- 
tions that were done for the good of the whole society and con- 
sequently could not forbear wishing well to those of the superior 
class that performed them. Secondly, the more intent they were 
in seeking their own advantage, without regard to others, the 
more they were hourly convinced that none stood so much in 
their way as those that were most like themselves. 

It being the interest then of the very worst of them, more than 
any, to preach up public-spiritedness, that they might reap the 
fruits of the labour and self-denial of others, and at the same time 
indulge their own appetites with less disturbance, they agreed with 
the rest to call everything, which, without regard to the public, 
man should commit to gratify any of his appetites, VICE; if in that 
action there could be observed the least prospect that it might 
either be injurious to any of the society or ever render himself 
less serviceable to others: and to give the name of VIRTUE to every 
performance, by which man, contrary to the impulse of nature, 
should endeavour the benefit of others or the conquest of his own 
passions out of a rational ambition of being good. 

It shall be objected that no society was ever any ways civilized 
before the major part had agreed upon some worship or other of 
an over-ruling power and consequently that the notions of good 
and evil and the distinction between virtue and vice were never 
the contrivance of politicians, but the pure effect of religion. 
Before I answer this objection, I must repeat what I have said 
already, that in this inquiry into the origin of moral virtue, I speak 
neither of Jews or Christians, but man in his state of nature and 
ignorance of the true Deity; and then I affirm, that the idolatrous 
superstitions of all other nations and the pitiful notions they had 
of the Supreme Being, were incapable of exciting man to virtue 



46 FABLE OF THE BEES 

and good for nothing but to awe and amuse a rude and unthinking 
multitude. It is evident from history that in all considerable soci- 
eties, how stupid or ridiculous soever people's received notions 
have been as to the deities they worshipped, human nature has 
ever exerted itself in all its branches and that there is no earthly 
wisdom or moral virtue, but at one time or other men have ex- 
celled in it in all monarchies and commonwealths, that for riches 
and power have been any ways remarkable. 

The Egyptians, not satisfied with having deified all the ugly 
monsters they could think on, were so silly as to adore the onions 
of their own sowing; yet at the same time their country was the 
most famous nursery of arts and sciences in the world and them- 
selves more eminently skilled in the deepest mysteries of nature 
than any nation has been since. 

No states or kingdoms under heaven have yielded more or 
greater patterns in all sorts of moral virtues than the Greek and 
Roman empires, more especially the latter; and yet how loose, 
absurd and ridiculous were their sentiments as to sacred matters? 
For without reflecting on the extravagant number of their deities, 
if we only consider the infamous stories they fathered upon them, 
it is not to be denied but that their religion, far from teaching men 
the conquest of their passions and the way to virtue, seemed rather 
contrived to justify their appetites and encourage their vices. But 
if we would know what made them excel in fortitude, courage, 
and magnanimity, we must cast our eyes on the pomp of their 
triumphs, the magnificence of their monuments and arches; their 
trophies, statues, and inscriptions; the variety of their military 
crowns, their honours decreed to the dead, public encomiums on 
the living, and other imaginary rewards they bestowed on men 
of merit; and we shall find that what carried so many of them to 
the utmost pitch of self-denial was nothing but their policy in 
making use of the most effectual means that human pride could 
be flattered with. 

It is visible, then, that it was not any heathen religion or other 
idolatrous superstition that first put man upon crossing his appe- 
tites and subduing his dearest inclinations, but the skilful man- 
agement of wary politicians; and the nearer we search into human 
nature, the more we shall be convinced that the moral virtues are 
the political offspring which flattery begot upon pride. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 47 

There is no man, of what capacity or penetration soever, that 
is wholly proof against the witchcraft of flattery, if artfully per- 
formed and suited to his abilities. Children and fools will swallow 
personal praise, but those that are more cunning, must be man- 
aged with much greater circumspection; and the more general the 
flattery is, the less it is suspected by those it is levelled at. What 
you say in commendation of a whole town is received with pleasure 
by all the inhabitants: speak in commendation of letters hi gen- 
eral, and every man of learning will think himself in particular 
obliged to you. You may safely praise the employment a man is 
of or the country he was born in because you give him an oppor- 
tunity of screening the joy he feels upon his own account under 
the esteem which he pretends to have for others. 

It is common among cunning men that understand the power 
which flattery has upon pride, when they are afraid they shall be 
imposed upon, to enlarge, though much against their conscience, 
upon the honour, fair dealing, and integrity of the family, country, 
or sometimes the profession of him they suspect; because they 
know that men often will change their resolution and act against 
their inclination, that they may have the pleasure of continuing 
to appear in the opinion of some what they are conscious not to 
be in reality. Thus sagacious moralists draw men like angels, in 
hopes that the pride at least of some will put them upon copying 
after the beautiful originals which they are represented to be. 

When the incomparable Sir Richard Steele, in the usual elegance 
of his easy style, dwells on the praises of his sublime species, and 
with all the embellishments of rhetoric sets forth the excellency 
of human nature, it is impossible not to be charmed with his happy 
turns of thought and the politeness of his expressions. But though 
I have been often moved by the force of his eloquence and ready 
to swallow the ingenious sophistry with pleasure, yet I could 
never be so serious, but, reflecting on his artful encomiums, I 
thought on the tricks made use of by the women that would teach 
children to be mannerly. When an awkward girl before she can 
either speak or go begins after many entreaties to make the first 
rude essays of curtesying, the nurse falls in an ecstacy of praise; 
"There is a delicate curtesy! O fine Miss! there is a pretty lady! 
Mama! Miss can make a better curtsey than her sister Molly!" 
The same is echoed over by the maids, whilst Mama almost hugs 



48 FABLE OF THE BEES 

the child to pieces; only Miss Molly, who being four years older, 
knows how to make a very handsome curtesy, wonders at the 
perverseness of their judgment, and swelling with indignation, is 
ready to cry at the injustice, that is done her, till, being whispered 
hi the ear that it is only to please the baby and that she is a 
woman, she grows proud at being let into the secret, and rejoicing 
at the superiority of her understanding, repeats what has been said 
with large additions and insults over the weakness of her sister, 
whom all this while she fancies to be the only bubble among them. 
These extravagant praises would by anyone above the capacity 
of an infant be called fulsome flatteries, and, if you will, abomina- 
ble lies; yet experience teaches us that by the help of such gross 
encomiums young misses will be brought to make pretty curtesies 
and behave themselves womanly much sooner, and with less trou- 
ble, than they would without them. It is the same with boys, whom 
they will strive to persuade that all fine gentlemen do as they are 
bid and that none but beggar boys are rude or dirty their clothes; 
nay, as soon as the wild brat with his untaught fist begins to fum- 
ble for his hat, the mother, to make him pull it off, tells him before 
he is two years old that he is a man; and if he repeats that action 
when she desires him, he is presently a captain, a lord mayor, a 
king, or something higher if she can think of it, till egged on by 
the force of praise, the little urchin endeavors to imitate man as 
well as he can and strains all his faculties to appear what his shal- 
low noddle imagines he is believed to be. 

The meanest wretch puts an inestimable value upon himself, and 
the highest wish of the ambitious man is to have all the world, as 
to that particular, of his opinion: so that the most insatiable thirst 
after fame that ever hero was inspired with was never more than 
an ungovernable greediness to engross the esteem and admiration 
of others in future ages as well as his own; and (what mortifica- 
tion soever this truth might be to the second thoughts of an Alex- 
ander or a Caesar) the great recompense in view, for which the 
most exalted minds have with so much alacrity sacrificed their 
quiet, health, sensual pleasures, and every inch of themselves, has 
never been anything else but the breath of man, the aerial coin 
of praise. Who can forbear laughing when he thinks on all the 
great men that have been so serious on the subject of that Mace- 
donian madman, his capacious soul, that mighty heart, in one 



FABLE OF THE BEES 49 

corner of which, according to Lorenzo Gratian, the world was so 
commodiously lodged that in the whole there was room for six 
more? Who can forbear laughing, I say, when he compares the 
fine things that have been said of Alexander with the end he 
proposed to himself from his vast exploits to be proved from his 
own mouth; when the vast pains he took to pass the Hydaspes 
forced him to cry out, Oh ye Athenians, could you believe what 
dangers I expose myself to, to be praised by you! To define then 
the reward of glory in the amplest manner, the most that can be 
said of it is that it consists in a superlative felicity which a man, 
who is conscious of having performed a noble action, enjoys in 
self-love, whilst he is thinking on the applause he expects of others. 

But here 1 shall be told that besides the noisy toils of war and 
public bustle of the ambitious there are noble and generous actions 
that are performed in silence; that virtue being its own reward, 
those who are really good have a satisfaction in their consciousness 
of being so, which is all the recompense they expect from the most 
worthy performances; that among the heathens there have been 
men, who, when they did good to others, were so far from covet- 
ing thanks and applause, that they took all imaginable care to be 
forever concealed from those on whom they bestowed their bene- 
fits, and consequently that pride has no hand in spurring man on 
to the highest pitch of self-denial. 

In answer to this I say that it is impossible to judge of a man's 
performance, unless we are thoroughly acquainted with the prin- 
ciple, and motive from which he acts. Pity, though it is the most 
gentle and the least mischievous of all our passions, is yet as much 
a frailty of our nature as anger, pride, or fear. The weakest minds 
have generally the greatest share of it, for which reason none are 
more compassionate than women and children. It must be owned 
that of all our weaknesses, it is the most amiable and bears the 
greatest resemblance to virtue; nay, without a considerable mix- 
ture of it, the society could hardly subsist: but as it is an impulse 
of nature that consults neither the public interest nor our own 
reason, it may produce evil as well as good. It has helped to 
destroy the honour of virgins and corrupted the integrity of 
judges; and whoever acts from it as a principle, what good soever 
he may bring to the society, has nothing to boast of, but that he 
has indulged a passion that has happened to be beneficial to the 



50 FABLE OF THE BEES 

public. There is no merit in saving an innocent babe ready to 
drop into the fire: the action is neither good nor bad, and what 
benefit soever the infant received, we only obliged ourselves; 
for to have seen it fall, and not strove to hinder it, would have 
caused a pain, which self-preservation compelled us to prevent: 
Nor has a rich prodigal, that happens to be of a commiserating 
temper and loves to gratify his passions, greater virtue to boast 
of when he relieves an object of compassion with what to himself 
is a trifle. 

But such men, as without complying with any weakness of their 
own, can part from what they value themselves and from no other 
motive but their love to goodness perform a worthy action in 
silence: such men, I confess, have acquired more refined notions 
of virtue than those I have hitherto spoke of; yet even in these 
(with which the world has yet never swarmed) we may discover 
no small symptoms of pride, and the humblest man alive must 
confess that the reward of a virtuous action, which is the satis- 
faction that ensues upon it, consists in a certain pleasure he pro- 
cures to himself by contemplating on his own worth: which 
pleasure, together with the occasion of it, are as certain signs of 
pride as looking pale and trembling at any imminent danger are 
the symptoms of fear. 

If the too scrupulous reader should at first view condemn these 
notions concerning the origin of moral virtue and think them per- 
haps offensive to Christianity, I hope he will forbear his censures 
when he shall consider that nothing can render the unsearchable 
depth of the Divine Wisdom more conspicuous than that man, 
whom Providence had designed for society, should not only by 
his own frailties and imperfections be led into the road to tem- 
poral happiness, but likewise receive, from a seeming necessity 
of natural causes, a tincture of that knowledge, in which he was 
afterwards to be made perfect by the true religion, to his eternal 
welfare. 



[1714-1723] 

REMARKS. 

{Notes on individual sections of The Grumbling Hive} 

Line 101. The soldiers that were forc'd to fight, 
If they surviv'd got honour by't. 



OO UNACCOUNTABLE is the desire to be thought 
well of in men, that though they are dragged into the war against 
their will, and some of them for their crimes, and are compelled to 
fight with threats and often blows, yet they would be esteemed for 
what they would have avoided if it had been in their power: 
whereas, if reason in man was of equal weight with his pride, he 
could never be pleased with praises, which he is conscious he does 
not deserve. 

By honour, in its proper and genuine signification, we mean 
nothing else but the good opinion of others, which is counted 
more or less substantial, the more or less noise or bustle there 
is made about the demonstration of it; and when we say the 
sovereign is the fountain of honour, it signifies that he has the 
power, by titles or ceremonies, or both together, to stamp a mark 
upon whom he pleases that shall be as current as his coin and 
procure the owner the good opinion of everybody, whether he 
deserves it or not. 

The reverse of honour is dishonour, or ignominy, which con- 
sists in the bad opinion and contempt of others; and as the first 
is counted a reward for good actions, so this is esteemed a pun- 
ishment for bad ones; and the more or less public or heinous the 
manner is in which this contempt of others is shown, the more 
or less the person so suffering is degraded by it. This ignominy is 
likewise called shame from the effect it produces; for though the 
good and evil of honour and dishonour are imaginary, yet there 
is a reality in shame, as it signifies a passion, that has its proper 
symptoms, over-rules our reason, and requires as much labour and 

.51 



52 FABLE OF THE BEES 

self-denial to be subdued as any of the rest; and since the most 
important actions of life often are regulated according to the 
influence this passion has upon us, a thorough understanding of 
it must help to illustrate the notions the world has of honour and 
ignominy. I shall therefore describe it at large. 

First, to define the passion of shame, I think it may be called a 
sorrowful reflection on our own unworthiness, proceeding from an 
apprehension that others either do, or might, if they knew all, 
deservedly despise us. The only objection of weight that can be 
raised against this definition is that innocent virgins are often 
ashamed and blush when they are guilty of no crime and can give 
no manner of reason for this frailty: and that men are often 
ashamed for others for, or with whom, they have neither friend- 
ship or affinity, and consequently that there may be a thousand 
instances of shame given, to which the words of the definition are 
not applicable. To answer this, I would have it first considered 
that the modesty of women is the result of custom and education, 
by which all unfashionable denudations and fifthy expressions are 
rendered frightful and abominable to them, and that notwithstand- 
ing this, the most virtuous young woman alive will often, in spite 
of her teeth, have thoughts and confused ideas of things arise in 
her imagination, which she would not reveal to some people for a 
thousand worlds. Then, I say that when obscene words are spoken 
in the presence of an unexperienced virgin, she is afraid that some 
body will reckon her to understand what they mean, and conse- 
quently that she understands this and that and several things which 
she desires to be thought ignorant of. The reflecting on this, and 
that thoughts are forming to her disadvantage, brings upon her 
that passion which we call shame; and whatever can sting her, 
though never so remote from lewdness, upon that set of thoughts 
I hinted and which she thinks criminal, will have the same effect, 
especially before men, as long as her modesty lasts. 

To try the truth of this, let them talk as much bawdy as they 
please in the room next to the same virtuous young woman, where 
she is sure that she is undiscovered, and she will hear, if not 
hearken to it, without blushing at all, because then she looks upon 
herself as no party concerned; and if the discourse should stain 
her cheeks with red, whatever her innocence may imagine, it is 
certain that what occasions her colour is a passion not half so 



FABLE OF THE BEES 53 

mortifying as that of shame; but if, in the same place, she hears 
something said of herself that must tend to her disgrace, or any- 
thing is named of which she is secretly guilty, then it is ten to 
one but she will be ashamed and blush, though nobody sees her; 
because she has room to fear that she is, or, if all was known, 
should be thought of contemptibly. 

That we are often ashamed and blush for others, which was 
the second part of the objection, is nothing else but that some- 
times we make the case of others too nearly our own; so people 
shriek out when they see others in danger: Whilst we are reflecting 
with too much earnest on the effect which such a blameable ac- 
tion, if it was ours, would produce in us, the spirits, and conse- 
quently the blood, are insensibly moved, after the same manner 
as if the action was our own, and so the same symptoms must 
appear. 

The shame that raw, ignorant, and ill-bred people, though seem- 
ingly without a cause, discover before their betters, is always 
accompanied with and proceeds from a consciousness of their 
weakness and inabilities; and the most modest man, how virtuous, 
knowing, and accomplished soever he might be, was never yet 
ashamed without some guilt or diffidence. Such as out of rusticity 
and want of education are unreasonably subject to and at every 
turn overcome by this passion, we call bashful; and those who out 
of disrespect to others and a false opinion of their own sufficiency 
have learned not to be affected with it when they should be, are 
called impudent or shameless. What strange contradictions man 
is made of! The reverse of shame is pride, (see Remark on 1. 182 
[pp. 86 ff.]) yet nobody can be touched with the first that never 
felt anything of the latter; for that we have such an extraordinary 
concern in what others think of us can proceed from nothing but 
the vast esteem we have of ourselves. 

That these two passions, in which the seeds of most virtues 
are contained, are realities in our frame, and not imaginary quali- 
ties, is demonstrable from the plain and different effects that, in 
spite of our reason, are produced in us as soon as we are affected 
with either. 

When a man is overwhelmed with shame, he observes a sink- 
ing of the spirits; the heart feels cold and condensed, and the blood 
flies from it to the circumference of the body; the face glows, the 



54 FABLE OF THE BEES 

neck and part of the breast partake of the fire: he is heavy as 
lead; the head is hung down, and the eyes through a mist of con- 
fusion are fixed on the ground: no injuries can move him; he is 
weary of his being, and heartily wishes he could make himself 
invisible: but when, gratifying his vanity, he exults in his pride, 
he discovers quite contrary symptoms; his spirits swell and fan 
the arterial blood; a more than ordinary warmth strengthens and 
dilates the heart; the extremities are cool; he feels light to himself 
and imagines he could tread on air; his head is held up, his eyes 
rolled about with sprightliness; he rejoices at his being, is prone 
to anger, and would be glad that all the world could take notice 
of him. 

It is incredible how necessary an ingredient shame is to make 
us sociable; it is a frailty in our nature; all the world, whenever 
it affects them, submit to it with regret and would prevent it if 
they could; yet the happiness of conversation depends upon it, and 
no society could be polished if the generality of mankind were 
not subject to it. As, therefore, the sense of shame is troublesome, 
and all creatures are ever labouring for their own defence, it is 
probable that man striving to avoid this uneasiness would, in a 
great measure, conquer his shame by that he was grown up; but 
this would be detrimental to the society, and therefore from his 
infancy, throughout his education, we endeavour to increase in- 
stead of lessening or destroying this sense of shame; and the only 
remedy prescribed is a strict observance of certain rules to avoid 
those things that might bring this troublesome sense of shame 
upon him. But as to rid or cure him of it, the politician would 
sooner take away his life. 

The rules I speak of consist in a dextrous management of our- 
selves, a stifling of our appetites, and hiding the real sentiments of 
our hearts before others. Those who are not instructed in these 
rules long before they come to years of maturity seldom make any 
progress in them afterwards. To acquire and bring to perfection 
the accomplishment I hint at, nothing is more assisting than pride 
and good sense. The greediness we have after the esteem of others 
and the raptures we enjoy in the thoughts of being liked and per- 
haps admired are equivalents that over-pay the conquest of the 
strongest passions, and consequently keep us at a great distance 
from all such words or actions that can bring shame upon us. The 



FABLE OF THE BEES 55 

passions we chiefly ought to hide for the happiness and embellish- 
ment of the society are lust, pride, and selfishness; therefore the 
word modesty has three different acceptations that vary with the 
passions it conceals. 

As to the first, I mean the branch of modesty that has a general 
pretension to chastity for its object, it consists in a sincere and 
painful endeavour with all our faculties to stifle and conceal before 
others that inclination which nature has given us to propagate our 
species. The lessons of it, like those of grammar, are taught us 
long before we have occasion for or understand the usefulness of 
them; for this reason children often are ashamed and blush out 
of modesty before the impulse of nature I hint at makes any 
impression upon them. A girl who is modestly educated may, 
before she is two years old, begin to observe how careful the 
women she converses with are of covering themselves before men; 
and the same caution being inculcated to her by precept as well 
as example, it is very probable that at six she will be ashamed of 
showing her leg, without knowing any reason why such an act 
is blameable or what the tendency of it is. 

To be modest, we ought, in the first place, to avoid all unfash- 
ionable denudations: a woman is not to be found fault with for 
going with her neck bare, if the custom of the country allows of it; 
and when the mode orders the stays to be cut very low, a bloom- 
ing virgin may, without fear of rational censure, show all the 
world: 

How firm her pouting breasts, that white as snow, 
On th' ample chest at mighty distance grow. 

But to suffer her ankle to be seen, where it is the fashion for 
women to hide their very feet, is a breach of modesty; and she is 
imprudent who shows half her face in a country where decency 
bids her to be veiled. In the second, our language must be chaste 
and not only free, but remote from obscenities, that is, whatever 
belongs to the multiplication of our species is not to be spoke of, 
and the least word or expression that, though at a great distance, 
has any relation to that performance ought never to come from 
our lips. Thirdly, all postures and motions that can any ways 
sully the imagination, that is, put us in mind of what I have called 
obscenities, are to be forbore with great caution. 



56 FABLE OF THE BEES 

A young woman, moreover, that would be thought well-bred, 
ought to be circumspect before men in all her behaviour and never 
known to receive from, much less to bestow favours upon them, 
unless the great age of the man, near consanguinity, or a vast 
superiority on either side plead her excuse. A young lady of re- 
fined education keeps a strict guard over her looks, as well as 
actions, and in her eyes we may read a consciousness that she has 
a treasure about her, not out of danger of being lost, and which 
yet she is resolved not to part with at any terms. Thousand satires 
have been made against prudes, and as many encomiums to extol 
the careless graces and negligent air of virtuous beauty. But the 
wiser sort of mankind are well assured that the free and open 
countenance of the smiling fair is more inviting and yields greater 
hopes to the seducer than the ever-watchful look of a forbidding 
eye. 

This strict reservedness is to be complied with by all young 
women, especially virgins, if they value the esteem of the polite 
and knowing world; men may take greater liberty because in them 
the appetite is more violent and ungovernable. Had equal harshness 
of discipline been imposed upon both, neither of them could have 
made the first advances, and propagation must have stood still 
among all the fashionable people: which being far from the poli- 
tician's aim, it was advisable to ease and indulge the sex that 
suffered most by the severity and make the rules abate of their 
rigour, where the passion was the strongest and the burden of a 
strict restraint would have been the most intolerable. 

For this reason, the man is allowed openly to profess the 
veneration and great esteem he has for women and show greater 
satisfaction, more mirth and gaiety in their company than he is 
used to do out of it. He may not only be complaisant and service- 
able to them on all occasions, but it is reckoned his duty to pro- 
tect and defend them. He may praise the good qualities they are 
possessed of and extol their merit with as many exaggerations as 
his invention will let him and are consistent with good sense. He 
may talk of love, he may sigh and complain of the rigours of the 
fair, and what his tongue must not utter he has the privilege to 
speak with his eyes, and in that language to say what he pleases; 
so it be done with decency, and short abrupted glances: but too 
closely to pursue a woman and fasten upon her with one's eyes is 



FABLE OF THE BEES 57 

counted very unmannerly; the reason is plain, it makes her uneasy, 
and, if she be not sufficiently fortified by art and dissimulation, 
often throws her into visible disorders. As the eyes are the win- 
dows of the soul, so this staring impudence flings a raw, unexperi- 
enced woman into panic fears that she may be seen through, and 
that the man will discover or has already betrayed what passes 
within her: it keeps her on a perpetual rack that commands her 
to reveal her secret wishes and seems designed to extort from her 
the grand truth, which modesty bids her with all her faculties to 
deny. 

The multitude will hardly believe the excessive force of educa- 
tion and in the difference of modesty between men and women 
ascribe that to' nature which is altogether owing to early instruc- 
tion: Miss is scarce three years old, but she is spoke to every day 
to hide her leg and rebuked in good earnest if she shows it; while 
little Master at the same age is bid to take up his coats and piss 
like a man. It is shame and education that contains the seeds of 
all politeness, and he that has neither and offers to speak the 
truth of his heart and what he feels within is the most contemptible 
creature upon earth, though he committed no other fault. If a 
man should tell a woman that he could like nobody so well to 
propagate his species upon as herself and that he found a violent 
desire that moment to go about it and accordingly offered to lay 
hold of her for that purpose, the consequence would be that he 
would be called a brute, the woman would run away, and himself 
be never admitted in any civil company. There is no body that has 
any sense of shame but would conquer the strongest passion 
rather than be so served. But a man need not conquer his pas- 
sions, it is sufficient that he conceals them. Virtue bids us subdue, 
but good breeding only requires we should hide our appetites. 
A fashionable gentleman may have as violent an inclination to 
a woman as the brutish fellow; but then he behaves himself quite 
otherwise; he first addresses the lady's father and demonstrates 
his ability splendidly to maintain his daughter; upon this he is 
admitted into her company, where, by flattery, submission, pres- 
ents, and assiduity, he endeavours to procure her liking to his 
person, which if he can compass, the lady in a little while resigns 
herself to him before witnesses in a most solemn manner; at night 
they go to bed together, where the most reserved virgin very tamely 



58 FABLE OF THE BEES 

suffers him to do what he pleases, and the upshot is, that he obtains 
what he wanted without ever having asked for it. 

The next day they receive visits, and nobody laughs at them 
or speaks a word of what they have been doing. As to the young 
couple themselves, they take no more notice of one another, I 
speak of well-bred people, than they did the day before; they eat 
and drink, divert themselves as usually, and having done nothing 
to be ashamed of, are looked upon as, what in reality they may 
be, the most modest people upon earth. What I mean by this is 
to demonstrate that by being well-bred, we suffer no abridgement 
in our sensual pleasures, but only labour for our mutual happiness 
and assist each other in the luxurious enjoyment of all worldly com- 
forts. The fine gentleman I spoke of need not practise any greater 
self-denial than the savage, and the latter acted more according to 
the laws of nature and sincerity than the first. The man that grati- 
fies his appetites after the manner the custom of the country allows 
of has no censure to fear. If he is hotter than goats or bulls, as 
soon as the ceremony is over, let him sate and fatigue himself 
with joy and ecstacies of pleasure, raise and indulge his appetites 
by turns, as extravagantly as his strength and manhood will give 
him leaye, he may with safety laugh at the wise men that should 
reprove him: all the women, and above nine in ten of the men, 
are of his side; nay, he has the liberty of valuing himself upon the 
fury of his unbridled passion, and the more he wallows in lust, and 
strains every faculty to be abandonedly voluptuous, the sooner 
he shall have the good-will and gain the affection of the women, 
not the young, vain, and lascivious only, but the prudent, grave, 
and most sober matrons. 

Because impudence is a vice, it does not follow that modesty 
is a virtue; it is built upon shame, a passion in our nature, and 
may be either good or bad according to the actions performed 
from that motive. Shame may hinder a prostitute from yielding to 
a man before company, and the same shame may cause a bashful 
good-natured creature, that has been overcome by frailty, to make 
away with her infant. Passions may do good by chance, but there 
can be no merit but in the conquest of them. 

Was there virtue in modesty, it would be of the same force in 
the dark as it is in the light, which it is not. This the men of 
pleasure know every well, who never trouble their heads with a 



FABLE OF THE BEES 59 

woman's virtue, so they can but conquer her modesty; seducers, 
therefore, do not make their attacks at noon-day, but cut their 
trenches at night. 

Ilia verecundis lux est praebenda puellis, 
Qua timidus latebras sperat habere pudor.* 

People of substance may sin without being exposed for their 
stolen pleasure; but servants and the poorer sort of women have 
seldom the opportunity of concealing a big belly or at least the 
consequences of it. It is possible that an unfortunate girl of good 
parentage may be left destitute and know no shift for a livelihood 
than to become a nursery or a chambermaid: she may be diligent, 
faithful, and 'obliging, have abundance of modesty, and if you 
will, be religious: she may resist temptations and preserve her 
chastity for years together, and yet at last meet with an unhappy 
moment in which she gives up her honour to a powerful deceiver, 
who afterwards neglects her. If she proves with child, her sorrows 
are unspeakable, and she cannot be reconciled with the wretched- 
ness of her condition; the fear of shame attacks her so lively, that 
every thought distracts her. All the family she lives in have a 
great opinion of her virtue, and her last mistress took her for a 
saint. How will her enemies, that envied her character, rejoice! 
How will her relations detest her! The more modest she is now, 
and the more violently the dread of coming to shame hurries her 
away, the more wicked and more cruel her resolutions will be, 
either against herself or what she bears. 

It is commonly imagined, that she who can destroy her child, 
her own flesh and blood, must have a vast stock of barbarity and 
be a savage monster, different from other women; but this is 
likewise a mistake, which we commit for the want of understand- 
ing nature and the force of passions. The same woman that mur- 
ders her bastard in the most execrable manner, if she is married 
afterwards, may take care of, cherish, and feel all the tenderness 
for her infant that the fondest mother can be capable of. All 
mothers naturally love their children: but as this is a passion and 
all passions centre in self-love, so it may be subdued by any 



*Ovid, Amores, I, 7-8: "It was such a light as shy maidens desire 
whose timid modesty hopes to hide away." 



60 FABLE OF THE BEES 

superior passion, to soothe that same self-love, which if nothing 
had intervened, would have bid her fondle her offspring. Common 
whores, whom all the world knows to be such, hardly ever destroy 
their children; nay, even those who assist in robberies and mur- 
ders seldom are guilty of this crime; not because they are less 
cruel or more virtuous, but because they have lost their modesty 
to a greater degree, and the fear of shame makes hardly any 
impression upon them. 

Our love to what never was within the reach of our senses is 
but poor and inconsiderable, and therefore women have no natural 
love to what they bear; their affection begins after the birth: what 
they feel before is the result of reason, education, and the thoughts 
of duty. Even when children first are born, the mother's love is 
but weak, and increases with the sensibility of the child, and grows 
up to a prodigious height, when by signs it begins to express his 
sorrows and joys, makes his wants known, and discovers his love 
to novelty and the multiplicity of his desires. What labours and 
hazards have not women undergone to maintain and save their 
children, what force and fortitude beyond their sex have they not 
shown in their behalf! but the vilest women have exerted them- 
selves on this head as violently as the best. All are prompted to 
it by a natural drift and inclination, without any consideration of 
the injury or benefit the society receives from it. There is no merit 
in pleasing ourselves, and the very offspring is often irreparably 
ruined by the excessive fondness of parents: for though infants, for 
two or three years, may be the better for this indulging care of 
mothers, yet afterwards, if not moderated, it may totally spoil 
them, and many it has brought to the gallows. 

If the reader thinks I have been too tedious on that branch of 
modesty, by the help of which we endeavour to appear chaste, 
I shall make him amends in the brevity with which I design to 
treat of the remaining part, by which we would make others 
believe that the esteem we have for them exceeds the value we 
have for ourselves, and that we have no disregard so great to any 
interest as we have to our own. This laudable quality is commonly 
known by the name of Manners and Good-breeding, and consists 
in a fashionable habit, acquired by precept and example, of flat- 
tering the pride and selfishness of others and concealing our own 
with judgment and dexterity. This must be only understood of 



FABLE OF THE BEES 61 

our commerce with our equals and superiors, and whilst we are 
in peace and amity with them; for our complaisance must never 
interfere with the rules of honour nor the homage that is due to 
us from servants and others that depend upon us. 

With this caution, I believe, that the definition will quadrate 
with everything that can be alleged as a piece or an example of 
either good-breeding or ill manners; and it will be very difficult 
throughout the various accidents of human life and conversation 
to find out an instance of modesty or impudence that is not com- 
prehended in, and illustrated by it, in all countries and in all 
ages. A man that asks considerable favours of one who is a 
stranger to him, without consideration, is called impudent, because 
he shows openly his selfishness without having any regard to the 
selfishness of the other. We may see in it, likewise, the reason why 
a man ought to speak of his wife and children and everything 
that is dear to him as sparing as is possible and hardly ever of 
himself, especially in commendation of them. A well-bred man 
may be desirous and even greedy after praise and the esteem of 
others, but to be praised to his face offends his modesty: the 
reason is this; all human creatures, before they are yet polished, 
receive an extraordinary pleasure in hearing themselves praised: 
this we are all conscious of, and therefore when we see a man 
openly enjoy and feast on this delight, in which we have no share, 
it rouses our selfishness, and immediately we begin to envy and 
hate him. For this reason, the well-bred man conceals his joy, 
and utterly denies that he feels any, and by this means consulting 
and soothing our selfishness, he averts that envy and hatred, which 
otherwise he would have justly to fear. When from our childhood 
we observe how those are ridiculed who calmly can hear their own 
praises, it is possible that we may strenuously endeavour to avoid 
that pleasure, that in tract of time we grow uneasy at the approach 
of it: but this is not following the dictates of nature, but warping 
her by education and custom; for if the generality of mankind took 
no delight in being praised, there could be no modesty in refusing 
to hear it. 

The man of manners picks not the best, but rather takes the 
worst out of the dish, and gets of everything, unless it be forced 
upon him, always the most indifferent share. By this civility the 
best remains for others, which being a compliment to all that are 



62 FABLE OF THE BEES 

present, everybody is pleased with it: the more they love them- 
selves, the more they are forced to approve of his behaviour, and 
gratitude stepping in, they are obliged almost, whether they will 
or not, to think favourably of him. After this manner, it is the 
well-bred man insinuates himself in the esteem of all the companies 
he comes in, and if he gets nothing else by it, the pleasure he 
receives in reflecting on the applause which he knows is secretly 
given him, is to a proud man more than an equivalent for his 
former self-denial, and overpays to self-love with interest the loss 
it sustained in his complaisance to others. 

If there are seven or eight apples or peaches among six people 
of ceremony, that are pretty near equal, he who is prevailed upon 
to choose first, will take that which, if there be any considerable 
difference, a child would know to be the worst: this he does to 
insinuate that he looks upon those he is v/ith to be of superior 
merit, and that there is not one whom he wishes not better to 
than he does to himself. It is custom and a general practice that 
makes this modish deceit familiar to us, without being shocked at 
the absurdity of it; for if people had been used to speak from the 
sincerity of their hearts, and act according to the natural sentiments 
they felt within until they were three or four and twenty, it would 
be impossible for them to assist at this comedy of manners, with- 
out either loud laughter or indignation; and yet it is certain that 
such behaviour makes us more tolerable to one another than we 
could be otherwise. 

It is very advantageous to the knowledge of ourselves to be able 
well to distinguish between good qualities and virtues. The bond 
of society exacts from every member a certain regard for others, 
which the highest is not exempt from in the presence of the 
meanest even in an empire: but when we are by ourselves, and 
so far removed from company as to be beyond the reach of their 
senses, the words modesty and impudence lose their meaning; a 
person may be wicked, but he cannot be immodest while he is 
alone, and no thought can be impudent that never was communi- 
cated to another. A man of exalted pride may so hide it that no- 
body shall be able to discover that he has any; and yet receive 
greater satisfaction from that passion than another who indulges 
himself in the declaration of it before all the world. Good manners 
having nothing to do with virtue or religion; instead of extinguish- 



FABLE OF THE BEES 63 

ing, they rather inflame the passions. The man of sense and edu- 
cation never exults more in his pride than when he hides it with 
the greatest dexterity; and in feasting on the applause, which he 
is sure all good judges will pay to his behaviour, he enjoys a 
pleasure altogether unknown to the short-sighted surly alderman, 
that shows his haughtiness glaringly in his face, pulls off his hat 
to nobody, and hardly deigns to speak to an inferior. 

A man may carefully avoid everything that in the eye of the 
world is esteemed to be the result of pride without mortifying 
himself or making the least conquest of his passion. It is possible 
that he only sacrifices the insipid outward part of his pride, which 
none but silly ignorant people take delight in, to that part we all 
feel within, and which the men of the highest spirit and most 
exalted genius feed on with so much ecstacy in silence. The pride 
of great and polite men is nowhere more conspicuous than in the 
debates about ceremony and precedency, where they have an 
opportunity of giving their vices the appearance of virtues and can 
make the world believe that it is their care, their tenderness for 
the dignity of their office or the honour of their masters, what is 
the result of their own personal pride and vanity. This is most 
manifest in all negotiations of ambassadors and plenipotentiaries, 
and must be known by all that observe what is transacted at public 
treaties; and it will ever be true that men of the best taste have 
no relish in their pride as long as any mortal can find out that 

they are proud. 

* * * * 

Line 163. And virtue, who from politics 

Has learn'd a thousand cunning tricks, 
Was, by their happy influence, 
Made friends with vice 

It may be said that virtue is made friends with vice, when indus- 
trious good people, who maintain their families and bring up their 
children handsomely, pay taxes, and are several ways useful mem- 
bers of the society, get a livelihood by something that chiefly 
depends on or is very much influenced by the vices of others, 
without being themselves guilty of, or accessary to them, any 
otherwise than by way of trade, as a druggist may be to poison- 
ing, or a sword-cutler to blood-shed. 



64 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Thus the merchant, that sends corn or cloth into foreign parts 
to purchase wines and brandies, encourages the growth or manu- 
factory of his own country; he is a benefactor to navigation, in- 
creases the customs, and is many ways beneficial to the public; 
yet it is not to be denied, but that his greatest dependence is 
lavishness and drunkenness: For, if none were to drink wine but 
such only as stand in need of it, nor anybody more than his health 
required, that multitude of wine-merchants, vintners, coopers, &c. 
that make such a considerable show in this flourishing city would 
be in a miserable condition. The same may be said not only of 
card and dice-makers that are the immediate ministers to a legion 
of vices, but of mercers, upholsterers, tailors, and many others, that 
would be starved in half a year's time if pride and luxury were at 

once to be banished the nation. 

* * * * 

Line 167. The worst of all the multitude 

Did something for the common good. 

This, I know, will seem to be a strange paradox to many; and 
I shall be asked what benefit the public receives from thieves and 
house-breakers. They are, I own, very pernicious to human society, 
and every government ought to take all imaginable care to root 
out and destroy them; yet if all people were strictly honest, and 
nobody would meddle with or pry into any thing but his own, 
half the smiths of the nation would want employment; and abun- 
dance of workmanship (which now serves for ornaments as well 
as defence) is to be seen everywhere both in town and country 
that would never have been thought of, but to secure us against 
the attempts of pilferers and robbers. 

If what I have said be thought far fetched, and my assertion 
seems still a paradox, I desire the reader to look upon the con- 
sumption of things, and he will find that the laziest and most un- 
active, the profligate and most mischievous, are all forced to do 
something for the common good, and whilst their mouths are 
not sewed up, and they continue to wear and otherwise destroy 
what the industrious are daily employed about to make, fetch and 
procure, in spite of their teeth obliged to help, maintain the poor 
and the public charges. The labour of millions would soon be at 
an end, if there were not other millions, as I say, in the fable, 



FABLE OF THE BEES 65 

Employ'd, 

To see their handy-works destroy'd. 

But men are not to be judged by the consequences that may 
succeed their actions, but the facts themselves and the motives 
which it shall appear they acted from. If an ill-natured miser, who 
is almost a plumb* and spends but fifty pounds a year, though he 
has no relation to inherit his wealth, should be robbed of five 
hundred or a thousand guineas, it is certain that as soon as this 
money should come to circulate, the nation would be the better 
for the robbery and receive the same and as real a benefit from 
it as if an archbishop had left the same sum to the public; yet 
justice and the peace of society require that he or they who robbed 
the miser should be hanged, though there were half a dozen of 
them concerned. 

Thieves and pick-pockets steal for a livelihood, and either what 
they can get honestly is not sufficient to keep them, or else they 
have an aversion to constant working: they want to gratify their 
senses, have victuals, strong drink, lewd women, and to be idle 
when they please. The victualler, who entertains them and takes 
their money, knowing which way they come at it, is very near as 
great a villain as his guests. But if he fleeces them well, minds his 
business, and is a prudent man, he may get money, and be punc- 
tual with them he deals with. The trusty out-clerk, whose chief 
aim is his master's profit, sends him in what beer he wants and 
takes care not to lose his custom; while the man's money is good, 
he thinks it no business of his to examine whom he gets it by. In 
the mean time, the wealthy brewer, who leaves all the manage- 
ment to his servants, knows nothing of the matter, but keeps his 
coach, treats his friends, and enjoys his pleasure with ease and a 
good conscience; he gets an estate, builds houses, and educates 
his children in plenty, without ever thinking on the labour which 
wretches perform, the shifts fools make, and the tricks knaves play 
to come at the commodity, by the vast sale of which he amasses 
his great riches. 

A highwayman having met with a considerable booty, gives a 
poor common harlot, he fancies, ten pounds to newrig her from 



*A plum, in the slang of Mandeville's day, meant the sum of 
100,000, or a person who had that much money. 



66 FABLE OF THE BEES 

top to toe; is there a spruce mercer so conscientious that he will 
refuse to sell her a thread sattin, though he knew who she was? 
She must have shoes and stockings, gloves, the stay and mantua- 
maker, the sempstress, the- linen-draper, all must get something 
by her, and a hundred different tradesmen dependent on those 
she laid her money out with may touch part of it before a month 
is at an end. The generous gentleman, in the mean time, his money 
being near spent, ventured again on the road, but the second day 
having committed a robbery near Highgate, he was taken with 
one of his accomplices, and the next sessions both were condemned 
and suffered the law. The money due on their conviction fell to 
three country fellows, on whom it was admirably well bestowed. 
One was an honest farmer, a sober painstaking man, but reduced 
by misfortunes: The summer before, by the mortality among the 
cattle, he had lost six cows out of ten, and now his landlord, to 
whom he owed thirty pounds, had seized on all his stock. The 
other was a day-labourer, who struggled hard with the world, had 
a sick wife at home, and several small children to provide for. 
The third was a gentleman's gardener, who maintained his father 
in prison, where, being bound for a neighbour, he had lain for 
twelve pounds almost a year and a half; this act of filial duty was 
the more meritorious, because he had for some time been engaged 
to a young woman, whose parents lived in good circumstances, 
but would not give their consent before our gardener had fifty 
guineas of his own to show. They received above fourscore pounds 
each, which extricated every one of them out of the difficulties 
they laboured under, and made them, in their opinion, the hap- 
piest people in the world. 

Nothing is more destructive, either in regard to the health or 
the vigilance and industry of the poor, than the infamous liquor, 
the name of which, derived from Juniper in Dutch, is now by 
frequent use and the laconic spirit of the nation from a word of 
meddling length, shrunk into a monosyllable, intoxicating Gin, 
that charms the unactive, the desperate and crazy of either sex, 
and makes the starving sot behold his rags and nakedness with 
stupid indolence, or banter both in senseless laughter and more 
insipid jests! It is a fiery lake that sets the brain in flame, burns 
up the entrails, and scorches every part within; and, at the same 
time, a Lethe of oblivion, in which the wretch immersed drowns 



FABLE OF THE BEES 67 

his most pinching cares and, with his reason, all anxious reflection 
on brats that cry for food, hard winter-frosts, and horrid empty 
home. 

In hot and adust* tempers it makes men quarrelsome, renders 
them brutes and savages, sets them on to fight for nothing, and 
has often been the cause of murder. It has broke and destroyed the 
strongest constitutions, thrown them into consumptions, and been 
the fatal and immediate occasion of apoplexies, phrenzies, and sud- 
den death. But, as these latter mischiefs happen but seldom, they 
might be overlooked and connived at: but this cannot be said of 
the many diseases that are familiar to the liquor, and which are 
daily and hourly produced by it; such as loss of appetite, fevers, 
black and yellow jaundice, convulsions, stone and gravel, dropsies, 
and leucophlegmacies. 

Among the doting admirers of this liquid poison, many of the 
meanest rank, from a sincere affection to the commodity itself, 
become dealers in it, and take delight to help others to what they 
love themselves, as whores commence bawds to make the profits 
of one trade subservient to the pleasures of the other. But as these 
starvelings commonly drink more than their gains, they seldom, 
by selling, mend the wretchedness of condition they laboured under 
while they were only buyers. In the fag-end and outskirts of the 
town and all places of the vilest resort, it is sold in some part or 
other of almost every house, frequently in cellars, and sometimes 
in the garret. The petty traders in this Stygian comfort are sup- 
plied by others in somewhat higher station, that keep professed 
brandy shops and are as little to be envied as the former; and 
among the middling people, I know not a more miserable shift 
for a livelihood than their calling. Whoever would thrive in it must, 
in the first place, be of a watchful and suspicious, as well as a 
bold and resolute temper, that he may not be imposed upon by 
cheats and sharpers, nor out-bullied by the oaths and imprecations 
of hackney coachmen and foot soldiers: in the second, he ought 
to be a dabster at gross jokes and loud laughter, and have all the 
winning ways to allure customers and draw out their money, and 
be well versed in the low jests and railleries the mob make use of 
to banter prudence and frugality. He must be affable and ob- 



*adust scorched and dry. 



68 FABLE OF THE BEES 

sequious to the most despicable; always ready and officious to 
help a porter down with his load, shake hands with a basket 
woman, pull off his hat to an oyster wench, and be familiar with 
a beggar; with patience and good humour he must be able to 
endure the filthy actions and viler language of nasty drabs and 
the lewdest rakehells, and without a frown or the least aversion, 
bear with all the stench and squalor, noise and impertinence, that 
the utmost indigence, laziness, and ebriety can produce in the most 
shameless and abandoned vulgar. 

The vast number of the shops I speak of throughout the city 
and suburbs are an astonishing evidence of the many seducers, 
that, in a lawful occupation, are accessary to the introduction and 
increase of all the sloth, sottishness, want, and misery, which the 
abuse of strong waters is the immediate cause of, to lift above 
mediocrity perhaps half a score men that deal in the same com- 
modity by wholesale, while, among the retailers, though qualified 
as I required, a much greater number are broke and ruined for 
not abstaining from the Circean cup they hold out to others, and 
the more fortunate are their whole lifetime obliged to take the 
uncommon pains, endure the hardships, and swallow all the un- 
grateful and shocking things I named, for little or nothing beyond 
a bare sustenance and their daily bread. 

The short-sighted vulgar in the chain of causes seldom can see 
further than one link; but those who can enlarge their view and 
will give themselves the leisure of gazing on the prospect of con- 
catenated events may, in a hundred places, see good spring up 
and pullulate from evil, as naturally as chickens do from eggs. 
The money that arises from the duties upon malt is a considerable 
part of the national revenue, and should no spirits be distilled from 
it, the public treasure would prodigiously suffer on that head. But 
if we would set hi a true light the many advantages and large 
catalogue of solid blessings that accrue from, and are owing to 
the evil I treat of, we are to consider the rents that are received, 
the ground that is tilled, the tools that are made, the cattle that 
are employed, and above all, the multitude of poor that are main- 
tained, by the variety of labour, required in husbandry, in malting, 
in carriage and distillation, before we can have the product of 
malt, which we call low wines, and is but the beginning from which 
the various spirits are afterwards to be made. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 69 

Besides this, a sharp-sighted good-humoured man might pick 
up abundance of good from the rubbish, which I have all flung 
away for evil. He would tell me, that whatever sloth and sottish- 
ness might be occasioned by the abuse of malt-spirits, the mod- 
erate use of it was of inestimable benefit to the poor, who could 
purchase no cordials of higher prices, that it was an universal 
comfort, not only in cold and weariness, but most of the afflictions 
that are peculiar to the necessitous, and had often to the most 
destitute supplied the places of meat, drink, clothes, and lodging. 
That the stupid indolence in the most wretched condition occa- 
sioned by those composing draughts, which I complained of, was 
a blessing to thousands, for that certainly those were the happiest, 
who felt the least pain. As to diseases, he would say, that, as it 
caused some, so it cured others, and that if the excess in those 
liquors had been sudden death to some few, the habit of drinking 
them daily prolonged the lives of many, whom once it agreed 
with; that for the loss sustained from the insignificant quarrels it 
created at home, we were overpaid in the advantage we received 
from it abroad, by upholding the courage of soldiers, and animating 
the sailors to the combat; and that in the two last wars no con- 
siderable victory had been obtained without. 

To the dismal account I have given of the retailers and what 
they are forced to submit to, he would answer that not many 
acquired more than middling riches in any trade, and that what I 
had counted so offensive and intolerable in the calling was trifling 
to those who were used to it; that what seemed irksome and 
calamitous to some, was delightful and often ravishing to others; 
as men differed in circumstances and education. He would put 
me in mind that the profit of an employment ever made amends 
for the toil and labour that belong to it, nor forget, Dulcis odor 
lucri e re qualibet;* or to tell me that the smell of gain was 
fragrant even to night- workers, f 

If I should ever urge to him that to have here and there one 
great and eminent distiller was a poor equivalent for the vile 
means, the certain want, and lasting misery of so many thousand 



* Juvenal, Sat. xiv, 204-5: The smell of gain is sweet whatever its 
source may be [slightly misquoted by Mandeville]. 

^night-workers men who carted away garbage and "night-soil", 
excrements, from the city. 



70 FABLE OF THE BEES 

wretches as were necessary to raise them, he would answer that 
of this I could be no judge, because I do not know what vast 
benefit they might afterwards be of to the commonwealth. Per- 
haps, would he say, the man thus raised will exert himself in the 
commission of the peace or other station with vigilance and zeal 
against the dissolute and disaffected, and retaining his stirring 
temper, be as industrious in spreading loyalty and the reformation 
of manners throughout every cranny of the wide populous town, 
as once he was in filling it with spirits; till he becomes at last the 
scourge of whores, of vagabonds and beggars, the terror of rioters 
and discontented rabbles, and constant plague to sabbath-breaking 
butchers. Here my good-humoured antagonist would exult and 
triumph over me, especially if he could instance to me such a 
bright example, what an uncommon blessing, would he cry out, 
is this man to his country! how shining and illustrious his virtue! 

To justify his exclamation, he would demonstrate to me that it 
was impossible to give a fuller evidence of self-denial in a grateful 
mind than to see him at the expence of his quiet and hazard of 
his life and limbs, be always harassing, and even for trifles perse- 
cuting that very class of men to whom he owes his fortune, from 
no other motive than his aversion to idleness and great concern 
for religion and the public welfare. 



Line 173. Parties directly opposite, 

Assist each other, as 'twere for spite. 

Nothing was more instrumental in forwarding the Reformation 
than the sloth and stupidity of the Roman clergy; yet the same 
Reformation has roused them from the laziness and ignorance 
they then laboured under; and the followers of Luther, Calvin, 
and others, may be said to have reformed not only those whom 
they drew into their sentiment, but likewise those who remained 
their greatest opposers. The clergy of England, by being severe 
upon the Schismatics and upbraiding them with want of learning, 
have raised themselves such formidable enemies as are not easily 
answered; and again, the Dissenters by prying into the lives, and 
diligently watching all the actions of their powerful antagonists, 
render those of the Established Church more cautious of giving 
offence, than in all probability they would if they had no malicious 



FABLE OF THE BEES 71 

over-lookers to fear. It is very much owing to the great number of 
Huguenots that have always been in France, since the late utter 
extirpation of them, that that kingdom has a less dissolute and 
more learned clergy to boast of than any other Roman Catholic 
country. The clergy of that church are nowhere more sovereign 
than in Italy, and therefore nowhere more debauched; nor any 
where more ignorant than they are in Spain, because their doc- 
trine is nowhere less opposed. 

Who would imagine that virtuous women, unknowingly, should 
be instrumental in promoting the advantage of prostitutes? Or 
(what still seems the greater paradox) that incontinence should 
be made serviceable to the preservation of chastity? and yet 
nothing is more true. A vicious young fellow, after having been an 
hour or two at church, a ball, or any other assembly, where there is 
a great parcel of handsome women dressed to the best advantage, 
will have his imagination more fired than if he had the same time 
been polling [voting] at Guildhall or walking in the country 
among a flock of sheep. The consequence of this is that he will 
strive to satisfy the appetite that is raised in him; and when he 
find honest women obstinate and uncomatable,* it is very natural 
to think that he will hasten to others that are more compliable. 
Who would so much as surmise that this is the fault of the vir- 
tuous women? They have no thoughts of men in dressing them- 
selves, poor souls, and endeavour only to appear clean and decent, 
every one according to her quality. 

I am far from encouraging vice and think it would be an unspeak- 
able felicity to a state if the sin of uncleanness could be utterly 
banished from it; but I am afraid it is impossible: The passions of 
some people are too violent to be curbed by any law or precept; 
and it is wisdom in all governments to bear with lesser incon- 
veniencies to prevent greater. If courtezans and strumpets were 
to be prosecuted with as much rigour as some silly people would 
have it, what locks or bars would be sufficient to preserve the 
honour of our wives and daughters? For it is not only that the 
women in general would meet with far greater temptations and 
the attempts to ensnare the innocence of virgins would seem more 
excuseable even to the sober part of mankind than they do now: 



*Un~come-at-able, a term probably coined by Mandeville himself. 



72 FABLE OF THE BEES 

but some men would grow outrageous, and ravishing would be- 
come a common crime. Where six or seven thousand sailors arrive 
at once, as it often happens, at Amsterdam, that have seen none 
but their own sex for many months together, how is it to be sup- 
posed that honest women should walk the streets unmolested if 
there were no harlots to be had at reasonable prices? for which 
reason, the wise rulers of that well-ordered city always tolerate 
an uncertain number of houses, in which women are hired as 
publicly as horses at a livery stable; and there being in this tolera- 
tion a great deal of prudence and economy to be seen, a short 
account of it will be no tiresome digression. 

In the first place, the houses I speak of are allowed to be no- 
where but in the most slovenly and unpolished part of the town, 
where seamen and strangers of no repute chiefly lodge and resort. 
The street in which most of them stand is counted scandalous, and 
the infamy is extended to all the neighbourhood round it. In the 
second, they are only places to meet and bargain in, to make 
appointments in order to promote interviews of greater secrecy, 
and no manner of lewdness is ever suffered to be transacted in them: 
which order is so strictly observed, that bar the ill manners and 
noise of the company that frequent them, you will meet with no 
more indecency and generally less lasciviousness there, than with 
us are to be seen at a playhouse. 4 

Thirdly, the female traders that come to these evening exchanges 
are always the scum of the people and generally such as in the 
day time carry fruit and other eatables about in wheel-barrows. 
The habits, indeed, they appear in at night are very different from 
their ordinary ones; yet they are commonly so ridiculously gay 
that they look more like the Roman dresses of strolling actresses 
than gentlewomen's clothes: if to this you add the awkwardness, 
the hard hands, and coarse breeding of the damsels that wear them, 
there is no great reason to fear that many of the better sort of 
people will be tempted by them. 

The music in these temples of Venus is performed by organs, 
not out of respect to the deity that is worshipped in them, but 
the frugality of the owners, whose business it is to procure as much 
sound for as little money as they can, and the policy of the govern- 
ment, who endeavour as little as is possible to encourage the breed 
of pipers and scrapers. All seafaring men, especially the Dutch, 



FABLE OF THE BEES 73 

are like the element they belong to, much given to loudness and 
roaring, and the noise of half a-dozen of them, when they call 
themselves merry, is sufficient to drown twice the number of flutes 
or violins; whereas, with one pair of organs they can make the 
whole house ring and are at no other charge than the keeping of 
one scurvy musician, which can cost them but little: yet notwith- 
standing the good rules and strict discipline that are observed in 
these markets of love, the schout and his officers are always vexing, 
mulcting, and, upon the least complaint, removing the miserable 
keepers of them: which policy is of two great uses; first, it gives 
an opportunity to a large parcel of officers, the magistrates make 
use of on many occasions, and which they could not be without, 
to squeeze a living out of the immoderate gains accruing from the 
worst of employments, and, at the same time, punish those neces- 
sary profligates, the bawds' and panders, which, though they abomi- 
nate, they desire yet not wholly to destroy. Secondly, as on several 
accounts it might be dangerous to let the multitude into the secret, 
that those houses and the trade that is drove in them are connived 
at, so by this means appearing unblameable, the wary magistrates 
preserve themselves in the good opinion of the weaker sort of 
people, who imagine that the government is always endeavouring, 
though unable, to suppress what it actually tolerates: whereas, if 
they had a mind to root them out, their power in the administra- 
tion of justice is so sovereign and extensive, and they know so 
well how to have it executed, that one week, nay, one night might 
send, them all a packing. 

In Italy, the toleration of strumpets is yet more barefaced, as is 
evident from their public stews. At Venice and Naples, impurity is 
a kind of merchandise and traffic; the courtezans at Rome and 
the cantoneras in Spain compose a body in the state and are under 
a legal tax and impost. It is well known that the reason why so 
many good politicians as these tolerate lewd houses, is not their 
irreligion, but to prevent a worse evil, an impurity of a more 
execrable kind, and to provide for the safety of women of honour. 
"About two hundred and fifty years ago," says Monsieur de St. 
Didier, "Venice being in want of courtezans, the republic was 
obliged to procure a great number from foreign parts." Doglioni, 
who has written the memorable affairs of Venice, highly extols 
the wisdom of the republic in this point, which secured the chastity 



74 FABLE OF THE BEES 

of women of honour daily exposed to public violences, the churches 
and consecrated places not being a sufficient asylum for their 
chastity. 

Our universities in England are much belied, if in some colleges 
there was not a monthly allowance ad expurgandos renes:* and 
time was when monks and priests in Germany were allowed con- 
cubines on paying a certain yearly duty to their prelate. "It is 
generally believed," says Monsieur Bayle, (to whom I owe the 
last paragraph) "that avarice was the cause of this shameful indul- 
gence; but it is more probable their design was to prevent their 
tempting modest women, and to quiet the uneasiness of husbands, 
whose resentments the clergy do well to avoid." From what has 
been said, it is manifest that there is a necessity of sacrificing one 
part of womankind to preserve the other and prevent a filthiness 
of a more heinous nature. From whence I think I may justly con- 
clude (what was the seeming paradox I went about to prove) 
that chastity may be supported by incontinence, and the best of 

virtues want the assistance of the worst of vices. 

* * * * 

Line 180. That noble sin 



The prodigality I call a noble sin is not that which has avarice 
for its companion and makes men unreasonably profuse to some 
of what they unjustly extort from others, but that agreeable good- 
natured vice that makes the chimney smoke and all the tradesmen 
smile; I mean the unmixed prodigality of heedless and voluptuous 
men, that being educated in plenty, abhor the vile thoughts of lucre 
and lavish away only what others took pains to scrape together; 
such as indulge their inclinations at their own expence, that have 
the continual satisfaction of bartering old gold for new pleasures, 
and from the excessive largeness of a diifusive soul are made guilty 
of despising too much what most people overvalue. 

When I speak thus honourably of this vice and treat it with so 
much tenderness and good manners as I do, I have the same thing 
at heart that made me give so many ill names to the reverse of it, 
viz., the interest of the public; for as the avaricious does no good 



*ad expurgandos renes for the relief of the reins, i.e., kidneys, 
although probably the sexual organs are meant. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 75 

to himself and is injurious to all the world besides, except his heir, 
so the prodigal is a blessing to the whole society and injures no 
body but himself. It is true that as most of the first are knaves, 
so the latter are all fools; yet they are delicious morsels for the 
public to feast on and may with as much justice as the French 
call the monks the patridges of the women, be styled the wood- 
cocks of the society. Was it not for prodigality, nothing could make 
us amends for the rapine and extortion of avarice in power. When 
a covetous statesman is gone, who spent his whole life in fattening 
himself with the spoils of the nation and had by pinching and 
plundering heaped up an immense treasure, it ought to fill every 
good member of the society with joy to behold the uncommon 
profuseness-of his son. This is refunding to the public what was 
robbed from it. Resuming of grants is a barbarous way of strip- 
ping, and it is ignoble to ruin a man faster than he does it himself, 
when he sets about it in such good earnest. Does he not feed an 
infinite number of dogs of all sorts and sizes, though he never 
hunts; keep more horses than any nobleman in the kingdom, 
though he never rides them; and give as large an allowance to an 
ill-favoured whore as would keep a duchess, though he never lies 
with her? Is he not still more extravagant in those things he makes 
use of? Therefore let him alone, or praise him, call him public- 
spirited lord, nobly bountiful and magnificently generous, and in 
a few years he will suffer himself to be stript his own way. As long 
as the nation has its own back again, we ought not to quarrel with 
the manner in which the plunder is repaid. 

Abundance of moderate men, I know, that are enemies to ex- 
tremes will tell me that frugality might happily supply the place 
of the two vices I speak of, that if men had not so many profuse 
ways of spending wealth, they would not be tempted to so many 
evil practices to scrape it together, and consequently that the same 
number of men, by equally avoiding both extremes, might render 
themselves more happy and be less vicious without than they 
could with them. Whoever argues thus shows himself a better man 
than he is a politician. Frugality is like honesty, a mean starving 
virtue, that is only fit for small societies of good peaceable men, 
who are contented to be poor, so they may be easy but, in a 
large stirring nation, you may have soon enough of it. It is an idle 
dreaming virtue that employs no hands, and therefore very useless 



76 FABLE OF THE BEES 

in a trading country, where there are vast numbers that one way 
or other must be all set to work. Prodigality has a thousand inven- 
tions to keep people from sitting still that frugality would never 
think of; and as this must consume a prodigious wealth, so avarice 
again knows innumerable tricks to raise it together, which frugality 
would scorn to make use of. 

Authors are always allowed to compare small things to great 
ones, especially if they ask leave first. Si licit exemplis, etc. but 
to compare great things to mean trivial ones is unsufferable, unless 
it be in burlesque; otherwise I would compare the body politic (I 
confess the simile is very low) to a bowl of punch. Avarice should 
be the souring, and prodigality the sweetening of it. The water I 
would call the ignorance, folly, and credulity of the floating insipid 
multitude; while wisdom, honour, fortitude, and the rest of the 
sublime qualities of men, which separated by art from the dregs 
of nature, the fire of glory has exalted and refined into a spiritual 
essence, should be an equivalent to brandy. I do not doubt but a 
Westphalian, Laplander, or any other dull stranger that is unac- 
quainted with the wholesome composition, if he was to sell the 
several ingredients apart, would think it impossible they should 
make any tolerable liquor. The lemons would be too sour, the 
sugar too luscious, the brandy he will say is too strong ever to be 
drank in any quantity, and the water he will call a tasteless liquor 
only fit for cows and horses: yet experience teaches us that the 
ingredients I named, judiciously mixed, will make an excellent 
liquor, liked of and admired by men of exquisite palates. 

As to our vices in particular, I could compare avarice, that 
causes so much mischief and is complained of by everybody who 
is not a miser, to a griping acid that sets our teeth on edge and 
is unpleasant to every palate that is not debauched: I could com- 
pare the gaudy trimming and splendid equipage of a profuse beau 
to the glistening brightness of the finest loaf sugar; for as the 
one, by correcting the sharpness, prevents the injuries which a 
gnawing sour might do to the bowels, so the other is a pleasing 
balsam that heals and makes amends for the smart, which the 
multitude always suffers from the gripes of the avaricious; while 
the substances of both melt away alike, and they consume them- 
selves by being beneficial to the several compositions they belong 



FABLE OF THE BEES 77 

to. I could carry on the simile as to proportions and the exact 
nicety to be observed in them, which would make it appear how 
little any of the ingredients could be spared in either of the mix- 
tures; but I will not tire my reader by pursuing too far a ludicrous 
comparison, when I have other matters to entertain him with of 
greater importance; and to sum up what I have said in this and 
the foregoing remark, shall only add that I look upon avarice and 
prodigality in the society as I do upon two contrary poisons in 
physic, of which it is certain that the noxious qualities being by 
mutual mischief corrected in both, they may assist each other and 

often make a good medicine between them. 

* * * * 

Line 180. Whilst luxury 

Employ'd a million of the poor, etc. 

If everything is to be luxury (as in strictness it ought) that is 
not immediately necessary to make man subsist as he is a living 
creature, there is nothing else to be found in the world, no not 
even among the naked savages; of which it is not probable that 
there are any but what by this time have made some improvements 
upon their former manner of living; and either in the preparation 
of their eatables, the ordering of their huts, or otherwise, added 
something to what once sufficed them. This definition everybody 
will say is too rigorous: I am of the same opinion; but if we are 
to abate one inch of this severity, I am afraid we shall not know 
where to stop. When people tell us they only desire to keep them- 
selves sweet and clean, there is no understanding what they would 
be at; if they made use of these words in their genuine proper 
literal sense, they might soon be satisfied without much cost or 
trouble, if they did not want water: but these two little adjectives 
are so comprehensive, especially in the dialect of some ladies, 
that nobody can guess how far they may be stretched. The com- 
forts of life are likewise so various and extensive, that nobody can 
tell what people mean by them, except he knows what sort of 
life they lead. The same obscurity I observe in the words decency 
and conveniency, and I never understand them unless I am ac- 
quainted with the quality of the persons that make use of them. 
People may go to church together and be all of one mind as much 



78 FABLE OF THE BEES 

as they please, I am apt to believe that when they pray for their 
daily bread, the bishop includes several things in that petition 
which the sexton does not think on. 

By what I have said hitherto I would only show that if once we 
depart from calling everything luxury that is not absolutely neces- 
sary to keep a man alive, that then there is no luxury at all; for if 
the wants of men are innumerable, then what ought to supply them 
has no bounds; what is called superfluous to some degree of peo- 
ple will be thought requisite to those of higher quality; and neither 
the world nor the skill of man can produce anything so curious 
or extravagant but some most gracious sovereign or other, if it 
either eases or diverts him, will reckon it among the necessaries 
of life; not meaning everybody's life, but that of his sacred person. 

It is a received notion that luxury is as destructive to the wealth 
of the whole body politic as it is to that of every individual per- 
son who is guilty of it, and that a national frugality enriches a 
country in the same manner as that which is less general increases 
the estates of private families. I confess, that though I have found 
men of much better understanding than myself of this opinion, I 
cannot help dissenting from them in this point. They argue thus: 
We send, say they, for example, to Turkey of woollen manufac- 
tury and other things of our own growth a million's worth every 
year; for this we bring back silk, mohair, drugs, etc. to the value 
of twelve hundred thousand pounds, that are all spent in our own 
country. By this, say they, we get nothing; but if most of us would 
be content with our own growth and so consume but half the quan- 
tity of those foreign commodities, then those in Turkey who 
would still want the same quantity of our manufactures would be 
forced to pay ready money for the rest, and so by the balance 
of that trade only, the nation should get six hundred thousand 
pounds per annum. 

To examine the force of this argument, we will suppose (what 
they would have) that but half the silk, etc. shall be consumed in 
England of what there is now; we will suppose likewise that those 
in Turkey, though we refuse to buy above half as much of their 
commodities as we used to do, either can or will not be without 
the same quantity of our manufactures they had before and that 
they will pay the balance in money; that is to say, that they shall 
give us as much gold or silver as the value of what they buy from 



FABLE OF THE BEES 79 

us exceeds the value of what we buy from them. Though what we 
suppose might perhaps be done for one year, it is impossible it 
should last: Buying is bartering; and no nation can buy goods of 
others that has none of her own to purchase them with. Spain and 
Portugal, that are yearly supplied with new gold and silver from 
their mines, may for ever buy for ready money, as long as their 
yearly increase of gold or silver continues; but then money is 
their growth and the commodity of the country. We know that 
we could not continue long to purchase the goods of other nations 
if they would not take our manufactures in payment for them; and 
why should we judge otherwise of other nations? If those in Tur- 
key, then, had no more money fall from the skies than we, let 
us see what would be the consequence of what we supposed. The 
six hundred thousand pounds in silk, mohair, etc. that are left 
upon their hands the first year, must make those commodities fall 
considerably: Of this the Dutch and French will reap the benefit 
as much as ourselves; and if we continue to refuse taking their 
commodities in payment for our manufactures, they can trade no 
longer with us, but must content themselves with buying what they 
want of such nations as are willing to take what we refuse, though 
their goods are much worse than ours; and thus our commerce 
with Turkey must in few years be infallibly lost. 

But they will say, perhaps, that to prevent the ill consequence 
I have showed, we shall take the Turkish merchandises as formerly 
and only be so frugal as to consume but half the quantity of them 
ourselves and send the rest abroad to be sold to others. Let us see 
what this will do, and whether it will enrich the nation by the 
balance of that trade with six hundred thousand pounds. In the 
first place, I will grant them that our people at home making use 
of so much more of our own manufactures, those who were em- 
ployed in silk, mohair, etc. will get a living by the various prepara- 
tions of woollen goods. But, in the second, I cannot allow that 
the goods can be sold as formerly; for suppose the half that is 
wore at home to be sold at the same rate as before, certainly the 
other half that is sent abroad will want very much of it: For we 
must send those goods to markets already supplied; and besides 
that, there must be freight, insurance, provision, and all other 
charges deducted, and the merchants in general must lose much 
more by. this half that is reshipped than they got by the half 



80 FABLE OF THE BEES 

that is consumed here. For, though the woollen manufactures are 
our own product, yet they stand the merchant that ships them off 
to foreign countries, in as much as they do the shopkeeper here 
that retails them: so that if the returns for what he sends abroad 
repay him not what his goods cost him here with all other charges, 
till he has the money and a good interest for it in cash, the mer- 
chant must run out, and the upshot would be that the merchants 
in general, finding they lost by the Turkish commodities they sent 
abroad, would ship no more of our manufactures than what would 
pay for as much silk, mohair, etc. as would be consumed here. 
Other nations would soon find ways to supply them with as much 
as we should send short, and somewhere or other to dispose of 
the goods we should refuse: so that all we should get by this 
frugality would be that those in Turkey would take but half the 
quantity of our manufactures of what they do now, while we 
encourage and wear their merchandises, without which they are 
not able to purchase ours. 

As I have had the mortification for several years to meet with 
abundance of sensible people against this opinion, and who always 
thought me wrong in this calculation, so I had the pleasure at 
last to see the wisdom of the nation fall into the same sentiments, 
as is so manifest from an act of parliament made in the year 1721, 
where the legislature disobliges a powerful and valuable company 
and overlooks very weighty inconveniences at home to promote 
the interest of the Turkey trade, and not only encourages the 
consumption of silk and mohair, but forces the subjects, on penal- 
ties, to make use of them whether they will or not. 

What is laid to the charge of luxury besides is that it increases 
avarice and rapine: And where they are reigning vices, offices of 
the greatest trust are bought and sold; the ministers that should 
serve the public, both great and small, corrupted, and the coun- 
tries every moment in danger of being betrayed to the highest 
bidders: And, lastly, that it effeminates and enervates the people, 
by which the nations become an easy prey to the first invaders. 
These are indeed terrible things; but what is put to the account of 
luxury belongs to mal-administration and is the fault of bad poli- 
tics. Every government ought to be thoroughly acquainted with 
and stedfastly to pursue the interest of the country. Good poli- 
ticians, by dexterous management, laying heavy impositions on 



FABLE OF THE BEES 81 

some goods, or totally prohibiting them, and lowering the duties on 
others may always turn and divert the course of trade which way 
they please; and as they will ever prefer, if it be equally consider- 
able, the commerce with such countries as can pay with money 
as well as goods, to those that can make no returns for what they 
buy, but in the commodities of their own growth and manufactures, 
so they will always carefully prevent the traffic with such nations 
as refuse the goods of others and will take nothing but money for 
their own. But, above all, they will keep a watchful eye over the 
balance of trade in general, and never suffer that all the foreign 
commodities together that are imported in one year shall exceed 
in value what of their own growth or manufacture is in the same 
imported to others. Note, that I speak now of the interest of those 
nations that have no gold or silver of their own growth, otherwise 
this maxim need not to be so much insisted on. 

If what I urged last be but diligently looked after and the im- 
ports are never allowed to be superior to the exports, no nation 
can ever be impoverished by foreign luxury; and they may improve 
it as much as they please if they can but in proportion raise the 
fund of their own that is to purchase it. 

Trade is the principal, but not the only requisite to aggrandize a 
nation: there are other things to be taken care of besides. The 
mewn and tuum must be secured, crimes punished, and all other 
laws concerning the administration of justice wisely contrived and 
strictly executed. Foreign affairs must be likewise prudently man- 
aged, -and the ministry of every nation ought to have a good intel- 
ligence abroad and be well acquainted with the public transactions 
of all those countries that either by their neighbourhood, strength, 
or interest may be hurtful or beneficial to them, to take the nec- 
essary measures accordingly of crossing some and assisting others, 
as policy and the balance of power direct. The multitude must be 
awed, no man's conscience forced, and the clergy allowed no 
greater share in state affairs than our Saviour has bequeathed in 
his testament. These are the arts that lead to worldly greatness: 
What sovereign power soever makes a good use of them, that has 
any considerable nation to govern, whether it be a monarchy, a 
commonwealth, or a mixture of both, can never fail of making it 
flourish in spite of all the other powers upon earth, and no luxury 
or other vice is ever able to shake their constitution. But here 



82 FABLE OF THE BEES 

I expect a full-mouthed cry against me. What! has God never 
punished and destroyed great nations for their sins? Yes, but not 
without means, by infatuating their governors and suffering them 
to depart from either all or some of those general maxims I have 
mentioned; and of all the famous states and empires the world 
has had to boast of hitherto, none ever came to ruin, whose de- 
struction was not principally owing to the bad politics, neglects, 
or mismanagements of the rulers. 

There is no doubt, but more health and vigour is expected 
among the people and their offspring from temperance and sobriety 
than there is from gluttony and drunkenness; yet I confess that 
as to luxury's effeminating and enervating a nation, I have not such 
frightful notions now, as I have had formerly. When we hear or 
read of things which we are altogether strangers to, they commonly 
bring to our imagination such ideas of what we have seen, as 
(according to our apprehension) must come the nearest to them: 
And I remember that when I have read of the luxury of Persia, 
Egypt, and other countries where it has been a reigning vice, and 
that were effeminated and enervated by it, it has sometimes put 
me in mind of the cramming and swilling of ordinary tradesmen 
at a city feast, and the beastliness their overgorging themselves is 
often attended with; at other times, it has made me think on the 
distraction of dissolute sailors, as I had seen them in company of 
half a dozen lewd women, roaring along with fiddles before them; 
and was I to have been carried into any of their great cities, I 
would have expected to have found one third of the people sick 
abed with surfeits; another laid up with the gout, or crippled by 
a more ignominious distemper; and the rest, that could go without 
leading, walk along the streets in petticoats. 

It is happy for us to have fear for a keeper, as long as our 
reason is not strong enough to govern our appetites, and I believe 
that the great dread I had more particularly against the word, to 
enervate, and some consequent thoughts on the etymology of it, 
did me abundance of good when I was a schoolboy. But since I 
have seen something in the world, the consequences of luxury to a 
nation seem not so dreadful to me as they did. As long as men 
have the same appetites, the same vices will remain. In all large 
societies, some will love whoring and others drinking. The lustful 
that can get no handsome clean women will content themselves 



FABLE OF THE BEES 83 

with dirty drabs, and those that cannot purchase true Hermitage 
or Pontack will be glad of more ordinary French claret. Those 
that cannot reach wine take up with most liquors, and a foot 
soldier or a beggar may make himself as drunk with stale beer 
or malt-spirits as a lord with Burgundy, Champaign, or Tockay. 
The cheapest and most slovenly way of indulging our passions does 
as much mischief to a man's constitution as the most elegant and 
expensive. 

The greatest excesses of luxury are shown in buildings, furni- 
ture, equipages, and clothes. Clean linen weakens a man no more 
than flannel; tapestry, fine painting, or good wainscot are no more 
unwholesome than bare walls; and a rich couch or a gilt chariot 
are no more enervating than the cold floor or a country cart. The 
refined pleasures of men of sense are seldom injurious to their 
constitution, and there are many great epicures that will refuse to 
eat or drink more than their heads or stomachs can bear. Sensual 
people may take as great care of themselves as any; and the errors 
of the most viciously luxurious do not so much consist in the fre- 
quent repetitions of their lewdness and their eating and drinking 
too much (which are the things which would most enervate them), 
as they do in the operose contrivances, the profuseness and nicety 
they are served with, and the vast expence they are at in their 
tables and amours. 

But let us once suppose that the ease and pleasures the grandees 
and the rich people of every nation live in render them unfit to 
endure hardships and undergo the toils of war. I will allow that 
most of the common council of the city would make but very 
indifferent foot soldiers; and I believe heartily, that if your horse 
was to be composed of aldermen, and such as most of them are, 
a small artillery of squibs would be sufficient to route them. But 
what have the aldermen, the common council, or indeed all peo- 
ple of any substance to do with the war, but to pay taxes? The 
hardships and fatigues of war that are personally suffered fall upon 
them that bear the brunt of everything, the meanest indigent part 
of the nation, the working slaving people. For how excessive 
soever the plenty and luxury of a nation may be, somebody must 
da the work, houses and ships must be built, merchandises must 
be removed, and the ground tilled. Such a variety of labours hi 
every great nation require a vast multitude, in which there are 



84 FABLE OF THE BEES 

always loose, idle, extravagant fellows enough to spare for an 
army; and those that are robust enough to hedge and ditch, plow 
and thrash, or else not too much enervated to be smiths, car- 
penters, sawyers, cloth-workers, porters or carmen will always be 
strong and hardy enough hi a campaign or two to make good 
soldiers, who, where good orders are kept, have seldom so much 
plenty and superfluity come to their share as to do them any hurt. 
The mischief, then, to be feared from luxury among the people 
of war cannot extend itself beyond the officers. The greatest of 
them are either men of a very high birth and princely education, 
or else extraordinary parts, and no less experience; and whoever 
is made choice of by a wise government to command an army 
en chef should have a consummate knowledge in martial affairs, 
intrepidity to keep him calm in the midst of danger, and many 
other qualifications that must be the work of time and application 
on men of a quick penetration, a distinguished genius, and a world 
of honor. Strong sinews and supple joints are trifling advantages, 
not regarded in persons of their reach and grandeur, that can 
destroy cities a-bed and ruin whole countries while they are at 
dinner. As they are most commonly men of great age, it would 
be ridiculous to expect a hale constitution and agility of limbs 
from them: so their heads be but active and well furnished, it is 
no great matter what the rest of their bodies are. If they cannot 
bear the fatigue of being on horseback, they may ride in coaches 
or be carried in litters. Men's conduct and sagacity are never the 
less for their being cripples, and the best general the king of France 
has now can hardly crawl along. Those that are immediately under 
the chief commanders must be very nigh of the same abilities and 
are generally men that have raised themselves to those posts by 
their merit. The other officers are all of them in their several sta- 
tions obliged to lay out so large a share of their pay in fine clothes, 
accoutrements, and other things by the luxury of the times called 
necessary, that they can spare but little money for debauches; for, 
as they are advanced and their salaries raised, so they are likewise 
forced to increase their expenses and their equipages which, as well 
as everything else, must still be proportionable to their quality: 
by which means, the greatest part of them are in a manner hindered 
from those excesses that might be destructive to health; while their 
luxury thus turned another way, serves, moreover, to heighten 



FABLE OF THE BEES 85 

their pride and vanity, the greatest motives to make them behave 
themselves like what they would be thought to be (See Remark on 
1. 321 [pp. 125 ff.]). 

There is nothing refines mankind more than love and honour. 
Those two passions are equivalent to many virtues, and therefore 
the greatest schools of breeding and good manners are courts and 
armies; the first to accomplish the women, the other to polish the 
men. What the generality of officers among civilized nations affect 
is a perfect knowledge of the world and the rules of honour, an 
air of frankness and humanity peculiar to military men of experi- 
ence, and such a mixture of modesty and undauntedness as may 
bespeak them both courteous and valiant. Where good sense is 
fashionable and a genteel behaviour is in esteem, gluttony and 
drunkenness can be no reigning vices. What officers of distinction 
chiefly aim at is not a beastly, but a splendid way of living, and 
the wishes of the most luxurious, in their several degrees of quality, 
are to appear handsomely and excel each other in finery of equip- 
age, politeness of entertainments, and the reputation of a judicious 
fancy in everything about them. 

But if there should be more dissolute reprobates among officers 
than there are among men of other professions, which is not true, 
yet the most debauched of them may be very serviceable if they 
have but a great share of honour. It is this that covers and makes 
up for a multitude of defects in them and it is this that none (how 
abandoned soever they are to pleasure) dare pretend to be without. 
But as there is no argument so convincing as matter of fact, let 
us look back on what so lately happened in our two last wars with 
France. How many puny young striplings have we had in our 
armies, tenderly educated, nice in their dress, and curious in their 
diet, that underwent all manner of duties with gallantry and cheer- 
fulness? 

Those that have such dismal apprehensions of luxury's ener- 
vating and effeminating people might in Flanders and Spain have 
seen embroidered beaux with fine laced shirts and powdered wigs 
stand as much fire and lead up to the mouth of a cannon with as 
little concern as it was possible for the most stinking slovens to 
have done in their own hair, though it had not been combed in a 
month, and met with abundance of wild rakes, who had actually 
impaired their healths, and broke their constitutions with excesses 



86 FABLE OF THE BEES 

of wine and women that yet behaved themselves with conduct and 
bravery against their enemies. Robustness is the least thing re- 
quired in an officer, and if sometimes strength is of use, a firm 
resolution of mind, which the hopes of preferment, emulation, and 
the love of glory inspire them with, will at a push supply the place 
of bodily force. 

Those that understand their business and have a sufficient sense 
of honour as soon as they are used to danger will always be capa- 
ble officers; and their luxury, as long as they spend nobody's money 
but their own, will never be prejudicial to a nation. 

By all wrrch I think I have proved what I designed in this re- 
mark on luxury. First, that in one sense everything may be called 
so, and in another there is no such thing. Secondly, that with a 
wise administration all people may swim in as much foreign luxury 
as their product can purchase without being impoverished by it. 
And lastly, that where military affairs are taken care of as they 
ought and the soldiers well paid and kept in good discipline, a 
wealthy nation may live in all the ease and plenty imaginable, and 
in many parts of it show as much pomp and delicacy as human 
wit can invent, and at the same time be formidable to their neigh- 
bours and come up to the character of the bees in the fable, of 
which I said that 

Flatter'd in peace, and fear'd in wars, 
They were th' esteem of foreigners; 
And lavish of their wealth and lives, 
The balance of all other hives. 

(See what is farther said concerning luxury in the Remarks on 

line 182 and 307 [below, and pp. 119 ff.]). 

* * * * 

Line 182. And odious pride a million more. 

Pride is that natural faculty by which every mortal that has any 
understanding over-values and imagines better things of himself 
than any impartial judge, thoroughly acquainted with all his quali- 
ties and circumstances, could allow him. We are possessed of no 
other quality so beneficial to society and so necessary to render it 
wealthy and flourishing as this, yet it is that which is most gen- 
erally detested. What is very peculiar to this faculty of ours is 



FABLE OF THE BEES 87 

that those who are the fullest of it are the least willing to connive 
at it in others; whereas the heinousness of other vices is the most 
extenuated by those who are guilty of them themselves. The chaste 
man hates fornication, and drunkenness is most abhorred by the 
temperate, but none are so much offended at their neighbour's 
pride as the proudest of all; and if any one can pardon it, it is the 
most humble: from which, I think, we may justly infer that it 
being odious to all the world is a certain sign that all the world is 
troubled with it. This all men of sense are ready to confess, and 
nobody denies but that he has pride in general. But, if you come to 
particulars, you will meet with few that will own any action you 
can name of theirs to have proceeded from that principle. There 
are likewise many who will allow that among the sinful nations of 
the times pride and luxury are the great promoters of trade, but 
they refuse to own the necessity there is that in a more virtuous 
age (such a one as should be free from pride) trade would hi a 
great measure decay. 

The Almighty, they say, has endowed us with the dominion over 
all things which the earth and sea produce or contain; there is 
nothing to be found in either but what was made for the use of 
man; and his skill and industry above other animals were given him 
that he might render both them and everything else within the 
reach of his senses more serviceable to him. Upon this considera- 
tion they think it impious to imagine that humility, temperance, 
and other virtues should debar people from the enjoyment of those 
comforts of life which are not denied to the most wicked nations; 
and so conclude that without pride or luxury the same things might 
be eat, wore, and consumed; the same number of handicrafts and 
artificers employed, and a nation be every way as flourishing as 
where those vices are the most predominant. 

As to wearing apparel in particular, they will tell you that pride, 
which sticks much nearer to us than our clothes, is only lodged in 
the heart, and that rags often conceal a greater portion of it than 
the most pompous attire; and that as it cannot be denied but that 
there have always been virtuous princes, who, with humble hearts, 
have wore their splendid diadems and swayed their envied scep- 
tres, void of ambition, for the good of others; so it is very probable 
that silver and gold brocades and the richest embroideries may 
without a thought of pride be wore by many whose quality and 



88 FABLE OF THE BEES 

fortune are suitable to them. May not (say they) a good man of 
extraordinary revenues make every year a greater variety of suits 
than it is possible he should wear out and yet have no other ends 
than to set the poor at work, to encourage trade, and by employ- 
ing many, to promote the welfare of his country? And considering 
food and raiment to be necessaries and the two chief articles to 
which all our worldly cares are extended, why may not all mankind 
set aside a considerable part of their income for the one as well 
as the other without the least tincture of pride? Nay, is not every 
member of the society in a manner obliged, according to his ability, 
to contribute toward the maintenance of that branch of trade on 
which the whole has so great a dependence? Besides that, to appear 
decently is a civility and often a duty, which, without any regard 
to ourselves, we owe to those we converse with. 

These are the objections generally made use of by haughty 
moralists who cannot endure to hear the dignity of their species 
arraigned; but if we look narrowly into them, they may soon be 
answered. 

If we had no vices, I cannot see why any man should ever make 
more suits than he has occasion for, though he was never so 
desirous of promoting the good of the nation: for, though in the 
wearing of a well-wrought silk rather than a slight stuff and the 
preferring curious fine cloth to coarse, he had no other view but 
the setting of more people to work and consequently the public 
welfare, yet he could consider clothes no otherwise than lovers 
of their country do taxes now; they may pay them with alacrity, 
but nobody gives more than his due; especially where all are justly 
rated according to their abilities, as it could no otherwise be ex- 
pected in a very virtuous age. Besides, that in such golden times 
nobody would dress above his condition, nobody pinch his family, 
cheat or overreach his neighbour to purchase finery, and conse- 
quently there would not be half the consumption nor a third part 
of the people employed as now there are. But to make this more 
plain and demonstrate that for the support of trade there can be 
nothing equivalent to pride, I shall examine the several views men 
have in outward apparel and set forth what daily experience may 
teach everybody as to dress. 

Clothes were originally made for two ends, to hide our naked- 
ness and to fence our bodies against the weather and other out- 



FABLE OF THE BEES 89 

ward injuries: to these our boundless pride has added a third, 
which is ornament; for what else but an excess of stupid vanity 
could have prevailed upon our reason to fancy that ornamental 
which must continually put us in mind of our wants and misery 
beyond all other animals that are ready clothed by nature herself? 
It is indeed to be admired how so sensible a creature as man, that 
pretends to so many fine qualities of his own, should condescend 
to value himself upon what is robbed from so innocent and 
defenceless an animal as a sheep, or what he is beholden for to 
the most insignificant thing upon earth, a dying worm; yet while 
he is proud of such trifling depredations, he has the folly to laugh 
at the Hottentots on the furthest promontory of Afric, who adorn 
themselves with the guts of their dead enemies without considering 
that they are the ensigns of their valour those barbarians are fine 
with, the true spolia opima, and that if their pride be more savage 
than ours, it is certainly less ridiculous because they wear the spoils 
of the more noble animal. 

But whatever reflections may be made on this head, the world 
has long since decided the matter; handsome apparel is a mam 
point, fine feathers make fine birds, and people, where they are 
not known, are generally honoured according to their clothes and 
other accoutrements they have about them; from the richness of 
them we judge of their wealth, and by their ordering of them we 
guess at their understanding. It is this which encourages everybody 
who is conscious of his little merit if he is any ways able to wear 
clothes above his rank, especially in large and populous cities, 
where obscure men may hourly meet with fifty strangers to one 
acquaintance, and consequently have the pleasure of being es- 
teemed by a vast majority, not as what they are, but what they 
appear to be : which is a greater temptation than most people want 
to be vain. 

Whoever takes delight in viewing the various scenes of low life, 
may on Easter, Whitsun, and other great holidays, meet with scores 
of people, especially women, of almost the lowest rank, that wear 
good and fashionable clothes: if coming to talk with them, you 
treat them more courteously and with greater respect than what 
they are conscious they deserve, they will commonly be ashamed 
of owning what they are; and often you may, if you are a little 
inquisitive, discover in them a most anxious care to conceal the 



90 FABLE OF THE BEES 

business they follow, and the place they live in. The reason is 
plain; while they receive those civilities that are not usually paid 
them, and which they think only due to their betters, they have the 
satisfaction to imagine that they appear what they would be, which 
to weak minds is a pleasure almost as substantial as they could 
reap from the very accomplishments of their wishes: this golden 
dream they are unwilling to be disturbed in, and being sure that 
the meanness of their condition, if it is known, must sink them 
very low in your opinion, they hug themselves in their disguise and 
take all imaginable precaution not to forfeit, by a useless discovery, 
the esteem which they flatter themselves that their good clothes 
have drawn from you. 

Though everybody allows that as to apparel and manner of 
living we ought to behave ourselves suitable to our conditions 
and follow the examples of the most sensible and prudent among 
our equals in rank and fortune, yet. how few that are not either 
miserably covetous or else proud of singularity have this discretion 
to boast of? We all look above ourselves and, as fast as we can, 
strive to imitate those that some way or other are superior to us. 

The poorest labourer's wife in the parish who scorns to wear 
a strong wholesome frize, as she might, will half starve herself 
and her husband to purchase a second-hand gown and petticoat 
that cannot do her half the service; because, forsooth, it is more 
genteel. The weaver, the shoemaker, the tailor, the barber, and 
every mean working fellow that can set up with little has the 
impudence with the first money he gets to dress himself like a 
tradesman of substance; the ordinary retailer in the clothing of 
his wife takes pattern from his neighbour that deals in the same 
commodity by wholesale, and the reason he gives for it is that 
twelve years ago the other had not a bigger shop than himself. 
The druggist, mercer, draper, and other creditable shopkeepers, 
can find no difference between themselves and merchants and 
therefore dress and live like them. The merchant's lady, who can- 
not bear the assurance of those mechanics, flies for refuge to the 
other end of the town and scorns to follow any fashion but what 
she takes from thence; this haughtiness alarms the court, the women 
of quality are frightened to see merchants' wives and daughters 
dressed like themselves: this impudence of the city, they cry, is 
intolerable; mantua-makers are sent for, and the contrivance of 



FABLE OF THE BEES 91 

fashions becomes all their study, that they may have always new 
modes ready to take up as soon as those saucy cits shall begin to 
imitate those in being. The same emulation is continued through 
the several degrees of quality to an incredible expence, till at last 
the prince's great favourites and those of the first rank of all, 
having nothing left to outstrip some of their inferiors, are forced to 
lay out vast estates in pompous equipages, magnificent furniture, 
sumptuous gardens, and princely palaces. 

To this emulation and continual striving to outdo one another 
it is owing that after so many various shiftings and changes of 
modes, in trumping up new ones and renewing of old ones, there 
is still a plus ultra left for the ingenious; it is this, or at least the 
consequence 'of it, that sets the poor to work, adds spurs to indus- 
try, and encourages the skilful artificer to search after further im- 
provements. 

It may be objected that many people of good fashion, who have 
been used to be well dressed out of custom, wear rich clothes with 
all the indifferency imaginable, and that the benefit to trade accru- 
ing from them cannot be ascribed to emulation or pride. To this 
I answer that it is impossible that those who trouble their heads 
so little with their dress could ever have wore those rich clothes 
if both the stuffs and fashions had not been first invented to gratify 
the vanity of others who took greater delight in fine apparel than 
they; besides that everybody is not without pride that appears 
to be so; all the symptoms of that vice are not easily discovered; 
they are manifold and vary according to the age, humour, circum- 
stances, and often constitution of the people. 

The choleric city captain seems impatient to come to action, and 
expressing his warlike genius by the firmness of his steps, makes 
his pike for want of enemies tremble at the valour of his arm; his 
martial finery, as he marches along, inspires him with an unusual 
elevation of mind, by which, endeavouring to forget his shop as 
well as himself, he looks up at the balconies with the fierceness 
of a Saracen conqueror; while the phlegmatic alderman, now 
become venerable both for his age and his authority, contents him- 
self with being thought a considerable man; and knowing no easier 
way to express his vanity, looks big in his coach, where being 
known by his paltry livery, he receives in sullen state the homage 
that is paid him by the meaner sort of people. 



92 FABLE OF THE BEES 

The beardless ensign counterfeits a gravity above his years and 
with ridiculous assurance strives to imitate the stern countenance 
of his colonel, flattering himself all the while that by his daring 
mien you will judge of his prowess. The youthful fair, in a vast 
concern of being overlooked, by the continual changing of her 
posture betrays a violent desire of being observed, and catching, 
as it were, at everybody's eyes, courts with obliging looks the 
admiration of her beholders. The conceited coxcomb, on the con- 
trary, displaying an air of sufficiency, is wholly taken up with the* 
contemplation of his own perfections, and in public places dis- 
covers such a disregard to others that the ignorant must imagine 
he thinks himself to be alone. 

These and such like are all manifest, though different, tokens 
of pride that are obvious to all the world; but man's vanity is not 
always so soon found out. When we perceive an air of humanity, 
and men seem not to be employed in admiring themselves nor 
altogether unmindful of others, we are apt to pronounce them 
void of pride when perhaps they are only fatigued with gratifying 
their vanity and become languid from a satiety of enjoyments. 
That outward show of peace within and drowsy composure of 
careless negligence with which a great man is often seen in his 
plain chariot to loll at ease are not always so free from art as 
they may seem to be. Nothing is more ravishing to the proud than 
to be thought happy. 

The well-bred gentleman places his greatest pride in the skill 
he has of covering it with dexterity, and some are so expert in 
concealing this frailty, that when they are the most guilty of it, 
the vulgar think them the most exempt from it. Thus the dissem- 
bling courtier, when he appears in state, assumes an air of modesty 
and good humour; and while he is ready to burst with vanity, seems 
to be wholly ignorant of his greatness, well knowing that those 
lovely qualities must heighten him in the esteem of others and 
be an addition to that grandeur which the coronets about his coach 
and harnesses, with the rest of his equipage, cannot fail to pro- 
claim without his assistance. 

And as in these pride is overlooked because industriously con- 
cealed, so in others again it is denied that they have any when 
they show (or at least seem to show) it hi the most public manner. 
The wealthy parson being as well as the rest of his profession 



FABLE OF THE BEES 93 

debarred from the gaiety of laymen, makes it his business to look 
out for an admirable black and the finest cloth that money can 
purchase and distinguishes himself by the fullness of his noble and 
spotless garment; his wigs are as fashionable as that form he is 
forced to comply with will admit of; but as he is only stinted in 
their shape, so he takes care that for goodness of hair and colour 
few noblemen shall be able to match him; his body is ever clean, 
as well as his clothes, his sleek face is kept constantly shaved, and 
his handsome nails are diligently pared; his smooth white hand 
and a brilliant of the first water, mutually becoming, honour each 
other with double graces; what linen he discovers is transparently 
curious, and he scorns ever to be seen abroad with a worse beaver 
than what a rich banker would be proud of on his wedding day; 
to all these niceties in dress he adds a majestic gait and expresses 
a commanding loftiness in his carriage; yet common civility not- 
withstanding the evidence of so many concurring symptoms will 
not allow us to suspect any of his actions to be the result of pride: 
considering the dignity of his office, it is only decency in him what 
would be vanity in others; and in good manners to his calling we 
ought to believe that the worthy gentleman, without any regard 
to his reverend person, puts himself to all this trouble and expence 
merely out of a respect which is due to the divine order he belongs 
to and a religious zeal to preserve his holy function from the con- 
tempt of scoffers. With all my heart, nothing of all this shall be 
called pride; let me only be allowed to say that to our human 
capacities it looks very like it. 

But if at last I should grant that there are men who enjoy all 
the fineries of equipage and furniture, as well as clothes, and yet 
have no pride in them; it is certain, that if all should be such, that 
emulation I spoke of before must cease, and consequently trade, 
which has so great a dependence upon it, suffer in every branch. 
For to say that if all men were truly virtuous they might without 
any regard to themselves consume as much out of zeal to serve 
their neighbours and promote the public good as they do now 
out of self-love and emulation is a miserable shift and an unreason- 
able supposition. As there have been good people in all ages, so 
without doubt we are not destitute of them in this; but let us 
inquire of the periwig-makers and tailors hi what gentlemen, even 
of the greatest wealth and highest quality, they ever could dis- 



94 FABLE OF THE BEES 

cover such public-spirited views. Ask the lacemen, the mercers, 
and the linen-drapers, whether the richest, and if you will, the 
most virtuous ladies, if they buy with ready money or intend to 
pay in any reasonable time, will not drive from shop to shop to 
try the market, make as many words, and stand as hard with them 
to save a groat or sixpence in a yard as the most necessitous jilts 
in town. If it be urged that if there are not, it is possible there might 
be such people, I answer that it is as possible that cats, instead 
of killing rats and mice, should feed them and go about the house 
to suckle and nurse their young ones; or that a kite should call the 
hens to their meat, as the cock does, and sit brooding over their 
chickens instead of devouring them; but if they should all do so, 
they would cease to be cats and kites; it is inconsistent with their 
natures, and the species of creatures which now we mean when 
we name cats and kites would be extinct as soon as that could come 

to pass. 

* * * * 

Line 183. Envy itself, and vanity, 

Were ministers of industry. 

Envy is that baseness in our nature which makes us grieve and 
pine at what we conceive to be a happiness in others. I do not 
believe there is a human creature in his senses arrived to maturity 
that at one time or other has not been carried away by this pas- 
sion in good earnest; and yet I never met with any one that dared 
own he was guilty of it but in jest. That we are so generally 
ashamed of this vice is owing to that strong habit of hypocrisy, 
by the help of which we have learned from our cradle to hide 
even from ourselves the vast extent of self-love and all its dif- 
ferent branches. It is impossible man should wish better for an- 
other than he does for himself, unless where he supposes an 
impossibility that himself should attain to those wishes; and from 
hence we may easily learn after what manner this passion is 
raised in us. In order to it, we are to consider first that as well as 
we think of ourselves, so ill we think of our neighbour with equal 
injustice; and when we apprehend that others do or will enjoy 
what we think they do not deserve, it afflicts and makes us angry 
with the cause of that disturbance. Secondly, that we are employed 
in wishing well for ourselves, everyone according to his judgment 



FABLE OF THE BEES 95 

and inclinations, and when we observe something we like and yet 
are destitute of in the possession of others, it occasions first sor- 
row in us for not having the thing we like. This sorrow is incur- 
able while we continue our esteem for the thing we want: but as 
self-defence is restless and never suffers us to leave any means 
untried how to remove evil from us, as far and as well as we are 
able, experience teaches us that nothing in nature more alleviates 
this sorrow than our anger against those who are possessed of what 
we esteem and want. This latter passion, therefore, we cherish and 
cultivate to save or relieve ourselves at least in part from the 
uneasiness we felt from the first. 

Envy, then, is a compound of grief and anger; the degrees of 
this passion depend chiefly on the nearness or remoteness of the 
objects as to circumstances. If one who is forced to walk on foot 
envies a great man for keeping a coach and six, it will never be 
with that violence or give him that disturbance which it may to 
a man who keeps a coach himself, but can only afford to drive 
with four horses. The symptoms of envy are as various and as 
hard to describe as those of the plague; at some time it appears 
in one shape, at others in another quite different. Among the fair 
the disease is very common and the signs of it very conspicuous 
in their opinions and censures of one another. In beautiful young 
women you may often discover this faculty to a high degree; they 
frequently will hate one another mortally at first sight from no 
other principle than envy; and you may read this scorn and 
unreasonable aversion in their very countenances if they have not 
a great deal of art and well learned to dissemble. 

In the rude and unpolished multitude this passion is very bare- 
faced, especially when they envy others for the goods of fortune. 
They rail at their betters, rip up their faults, and take pains to 
misconstrue their most commendable actions. They murmur at 
Providence and loudly complain that the good things of this world 
are chiefly enjoyed by those who do not deserve them. The grosser 
sort of them it often affects so violently that if they were not with- 
held by the fear of the laws, they would go directly and beat those 
their envy is levelled at from no other provocation than what that 
passion suggests to them. 

The men of letters, labouring under this distemper, discover 
quite dif| erent symptoms. When they envy a person for his parts 



96 FABLE OF THE BEES 

and erudition, their chief care is industriously to conceal their 
frailty, which generally is attempted by denying and depreciating 
the good qualities they envy. They carefully peruse his works and 
are displeased with every fine passage they meet with; they look 
for nothing but his errors and wish for no greater feast than a 
gross mistake. In their censures they are captious as well as severe, 
make mountains of mole-hills, and will not pardon the least 
shadow of a fault, but exaggerate the most trifling omission into 
a capital blunder. 

Envy is visible in brute beasts; horses show it in their endeavours 
of outstripping one another; and the best spirited will run them- 
selves to death before they will suffer another before them. In 
dogs this passion is likewise plainly to be seen; those who are used 
to be caressed will never tamely bear that felicity in others. I have 
seen a lap-dog that would choke himself with victuals rather than 
leave any thing for a competitor of his own kind; and we may 
often observe the same behaviour in those creatures which we 
daily see in infants that are froward and by being over-fondled 
made humour-some. If out of caprice they at any time refuse to 
eat what they have asked for, and we can make them believe that 
somebody else, nay, even the cat or the dog is going to take it 
from them, they will make an end of their oughts* with pleasure 
and feed even against their appetite. 

If envy was not rivetted in human nature, it would not be so 
common in children, and youth would not be so generally spurred 
on by emulation. Those who would derive every thing that is 
beneficial to the society from a good principle ascribe the effects 
of emulation in school-boys to a virtue of the mind; as it requires 
labour and pains, so it is evident that they commit a self-denial 
who act from that disposition; but if we look narrowly into it, 
we shall find that this sacrifice of ease and pleasure is only made 
to envy and the love of glory. If there was not something very 
like this passion mixed with that pretended virtue it would be 
impossible to raise and increase it by the same means that create 
envy. The boy who receives a reward for the superiority of his 
performance is conscious of the vexation it would have been to 
him if he should have fallen short of it. This reflection makes him 



*probably arts, scraps and left-overs. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 97 

exert himself, not to be outdone by those whom he looks upon 
as his inferiors, and the greater his pride is, the more self-denial 
he will practice to maintain his conquest. The other, who, in spite 
of the pains he took to do well, has missed of the prize, is sorry 
and consequently angry with him whom he must look upon as the 
cause of his grief. But to show this anger would be ridiculous and 
of no service to him, so that he must either be contented to be 
less esteemed than the other boy, or, by renewing his endeavors, 
become a greater proficient; and it is ten to one but the disinter- 
ested, good-humoured, and peaceable lad will choose the first, 
and so become indolent and inactive, while the covetous, peevish, 
and quarrelsome rascal shall take incredible pains and make him- 
self a conqueror in his turn. 

Envy, as it is very common among painters, so it is of great 
use for their improvement. I do not mean that little daubers envy 
great masters, but most of them are tainted with this vice against 
those immediately above them. If the pupil of a famous artist is 
of a bright genius and uncommon application, he first adores his 
master; but as his own skill increases, he begins insensibly to envy 
what he admired before. To learn the nature of this passion and 
that it consists in what I have named, we are but to observe that 
if a painter, by exerting himself, comes not only to equal but to 
exceed the man he envied, his sorrow is gone and all his anger 
disarmed; and if he hated him before, he is now glad to be friends 
with him if the other will condescend to it. 

Married women who are guilty of this vice, which few are not, 
are always endeavouring to raise the same passion in their spouses; 
and where they have prevailed, envy and emulation have kept more 
men in bounds and reformed more ill husbands from sloth, from 
drinking, and other evil courses, than all the sermons that have 
been preached since the time of the Apostles. 

As everybody would be happy, enjoy pleasure, and avoid pain 
if he could, so self-love bids us look on every creature that seems 
satisfied as a rival in happiness; and the satisfaction we have in 
feeling that felicity disturbed without any advantage to ourselves 
but what springs from the pleasure we have in beholding it is called 
loving mischief for mischief's sake; and the motive of which that 
frailty is the result, malice, another offspring derived from the same 
original; for if there was no envy, there could be no malice. When 



98 FABLE OF THE BEES 

the passions lie dormant, we think they have not such a frailty in 
their nature because that moment they are not affected with it. 

A gentleman well dressed, who happens to be dirtied all over 
by a coach or a cart, is laughed at, and by his inferiors much more 
than his equals because they envy him more: they know he is 
vexed at it, and, imagining him to be happier than themselves, 
they are glad to see him meet with displeasures in his turn! But 
a young lady, if she be in a serious mood, instead of laughing at, 
pities him because a clean man is a sight she takes delight in, and 
there is no room for envy. At disasters we either laugh or pity 
those that befall them, according to the stock we are possessed of, 
either malice or compassion. If a man falls or hurts himself so 
slightly that it moves not the latter, we laugh, and here our pity 
and malice shake us alternately: Indeed, Sir, I am very sorry for 
it, I beg your pardon for laughing, I am the silliest creature in 
the world, then laugh again; and again, I am indeed very sorry, 
and so on. Some are so malicious, they would laugh if a man broke 
his leg, and others are so compassionate that they can heartily 
pity a man for the least spot in his clothes; but nobody is so savage 
that no compassion can touch him, nor any man so good-natured 
as never* to be affected with any malicious pleasure. How strangely 
our passions govern us! We envy a man for being rich, and then 
perfectly hate him. But if we come to be his equals, we are calm, 
and the least condescension in him makes us friends; but if we 
become visibly superior to him, we can pity his misfortunes. The 
reason why men of true good sense envy less than others is be- 
cause they admire themselves with less hesitation than fools and 
silly people; for, though they do not show this to others, yet the 
solidity of their thinking gives them an assurance of their real 
worth, which men of weak understanding can never feel within, 
though they often counterfeit it. 

The ostracism of the Greeks was a sacrifice of valuable men 
made to epidemic envy and often applied as an infallible remedy 
to cure and prevent the mischiefs of popular spleen and rancour. 
A victim of state often appeases the murmurs of a whole nation, 
and after-ages frequently wonder at barbarities of this nature, 
which, under the same circumstances, they would have committed 
themselves. They are compliments to the people's malice, which is 
never better gratified than when they can see a great man humbled. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 99 

We believe that we love justice and to see merit rewarded; but 
if men continue long in the first posts of honour, half of us grow 
weary of them, look for their faults, and, if we can find none, we 
suppose they hide them, and it is much if the greatest part of us 
do not wish them discarded. This foul play the best of men ought 
ever to apprehend from all who are not their immediate friends or 
acquaintance because nothing is more tiresome to us than the 
repetition of praises we have no manner of share in. 

The more a passion is a compound of many others, the more 
difficult it is to define it; and the more it is tormenting to those 
that labour under it, the greater cruelty it is capable of inspiring 
them with against others. Therefore nothing is more whimsical or 
mischievous than jealousy, which is made up of love, hope, fear, 
and a great deal of envy. The last has been sufficiently treated of 
already; and what I have to say of fear, the reader will find under 
Remark on 1. 321 [p. 131]. So that the better to explain and illus- 
trate this odd mixture, the ingredients I shall further speak of in 
this place are hope and love. 

Hoping is wishing with some degree of confidence that the thing 
wished for will come to pass. The firmness and imbecility of our 
hope depend entirely on the greater or lesser degree of our con- 
fidence, and all hope includes doubt; for when our confidence is 
arrived to that height as to exclude all doubts, it becomes a cer- 
tainty, and we take for granted what we only hoped for before. 
A silver inkhorn may pass in speech because everybody knows 
what we mean by it, but a certain hope* cannot. For a man who 
makes use of an epithet that destroys the essence of the substan- 
tive he joins it to can have no meaning at all; and the more clearly 
we understand the force of the epithet and the nature of the sub- 
stantive, the more palpable is the nonsense of the heterogeneous 
compound. The reason, therefore, why it is no so shocking to 
some to hear a man speak of certain hope as if he should talk of 
hot ice or liquid oak is not because there is less nonsense contained 
hi the first than there is in either of the latter, but because the 
word hope, I mean the essence of it, is not so clearly understood 



* certain hope Since the words certain hope appear in the Angli- 
can liturgy, Mandeville's criticism in this passage was particularly 
irritating to the orthodox. See Kaye's ed., I, 141. 



100 FABLE OF THE BEES 

by the generality of the people as the words and essence of ice 
and oak are. 

Love, in the first place, signifies affection, such as parents and 
nurses bear to children and friends to one another; it consists in 
a liking and well-wishing to the person beloved. We give an easy 
construction to his words and actions and feel a proneness to 
excuse and forgive his faults if we see any; his interest we make 
on all accounts our own, even to our prejudice, and receive an 
inward satisfaction for sympathising with him hi his sorrows as 
well as joys. What I said last is not impossible, whatever it may 
seem to be; for, when we are sincere in sharing with another hi 
his misfortunes, self-love makes us believe that the sufferings we 
feel must alleviate and lessen those of our friend; and while this 
fond reflection is soothing our pain, a secret pleasure arises from 
our grieving for the person we love. 

Secondly, by love we understand a strong inclination hi its 
nature distinct from all other affections of friendship, gratitude, 
and consanguinity that persons of different sexes, after liking bear 
to one another; it is in this signification, that love enters into the 
compound of jealousy and is the effect as well as happy disguise 
of that passion that prompts us to labour for the preservation of 
our species. This latter appetite is innate both in men and women 
who are not defective in their formation, as much as hunger or 
thirst, though they are seldom affected with it before the years of 
puberty. Could we undress nature and pry into her deepest re- 
cesses, we should discover the the seeds of this passion before it 
exerts itself as plainly as we see the teeth in an embryo before the 
gums are formed. There are few healthy people of either sex whom 
it has made no impression on before twenty. Yet, as the peace and 
happiness of the civil society require that this should be kept a 
secret never to be talked of in public, so among well-bred people 
it is counted highly criminal to mention before company anything 
in plain words that is relating to this mystery of succession; by 
which means, the very name of the appetite, though the most nec- 
essary for the continuance of mankind, is become odious, and the 
proper epithets commonly joined to lust are filthy and abominable. 

This impulse of nature in people of strict morals and rigid 
modesty often disturbs the body for a considerable time before 
it is understood or known to be what it is, and it is remarkable 



FABLE OF THE BEES 101 

that the most polished and best instructed are generally the most 
ignorant as to this affair; and here I can but observe the difference 
between man in the wild state of nature and the same creature in 
the civil society. In the first, men and women, if left rude and 
untaught in the sciences of modes and manners, would quickly 
find out the cause of that disturbance and be at a loss no more 
than other animals for a present remedy; besides, that it is not 
probable they would want either precept or example from the 
more experienced. But, in the second, where the rules of religion, 
law, and decency, are to be followed and obeyed before any dic- 
tates of nature, the youth of both sexes are to be armed and for- 
tified against this impulse and from their infancy artfully frightened 
from the most remote approaches of it. The appetite itself and 
all the symptoms of it, though they are plainly felt and understood, 
are to be stifled with care and severity and in women flatly dis- 
owned, and if there be occasion, with obstinacy denied, even when 
themselves are affected by them. If it throws them into distempers, 
they must be cured by physic or else patiently bear them in silence; 
and it is the interest of the society to preserve decency and polite- 
ness; that women should linger, waste, and die rather than relieve 
themselves in an unlawful manner; and among the fashionable 
part of mankind, the people of birth and fortune, it is expected 
that matrimony should never be entered upon without a curious 
regard to family, estate, and reputation, and, in the making of 
matches, the call of nature be the very last consideration. 

Those, then, who would make love and lust synonymous con- 
found the effect with the cause of it; yet such is the force of edu- 
cation and a habit of thinking, as we are taught that sometimes 
persons of either sex are actually in love without feeling any carnal 
desires or penetrating into the intentions of nature, the end pro- 
posed by her, without which they could never have been affected 
with that sort of passion. That there are such is certain, but many 
more whose pretences to those refined notions are only upheld by 
art and dissimulation. Those who are really such Platonic lovers 
are commonly pale-faced weakly people of cold and phlegmatic 
constitutions in either sex; the hale and robust, of bilious tem- 
perament and a sanguine complexion, never entertain any love 
so spiritual as to exclude all thoughts and wishes that relate to 
the body; but if the most seraphic lovers would know the original 



102 FABLE OF THE BEES 

of their inclination, let them but suppose that another should have 
the corporal enjoyment of the person beloved, and by the tortures 
they will suffer from that reflection they will soon discover the 
nature of their passions; whereas, on the contrary, parents and 
friends receive a satisfaction in reflecting on the joys and comforts 
of a happy marriage to be tasted by those they wish well to. 

The curious, that are skilled in anatomizing the invisible part 
of man, will observe that the more sublime and exempt this love 
is from all thoughts of sensuality, the more spurious it is and the 
more it degenerates from its honest original and primitive sim- 
plicity. The power and sagacity as well as labour and care of the 
politician in civilizing the society has been nowhere more con- 
spicuous than in the happy contrivance of playing our passions 
against one another. By flattering our pride and still increasing 
the good opinion we have of ourselves on the one hand and inspir- 
ing us on the other with a superlative dread and mortal aversion 
against shame, the artful moralists have taught us cheerfully to 
encounter ourselves, and if not subdue, at least so to conceal and 
disguise our darling passion, lust, that we scarce know it when we 
meet with it in our breasts. Oh! the mighty prize we have in view 
for all our self-denial! Can any man be so serious as to abstain 
from laughter when he considers that for so much deceit and 
insincerity practiced upon ourselves as well as others, we have no 
other recompense than the vain satisfaction of making our species 
appear more exalted and remote from that of other animals than 
it really is, and we in our consciences know it to be? Yet this 
is fact, and in it we plainly perceive the reason why it was nec- 
essary to render odious every word or action by which we might 
discover the innate desire we feel to perpetuate our kind; and 
why tamely to submit to the violence of a furious appetite (which 
is painful to resist) and innocently to obey the most pressing 
demand of nature without guile or hypocrisy, like other creatures, 
should be branded with the ignominious name of brutality. 

What we call love, then, is not a genuine, but an adulterated 
appetite, or rather a compound, a heap of several contradictory 
passions blended in one. As it is a product of nature warped by 
custom and education, so the true origin and first motive of it, 
as I have hinted already, is stifled in well-bred people and con- 
cealed from themselves: all which is the reason that, as those 



FABLE OF THE BEES 103 

affected with it vary in age, strength, resolution, temper, circum- 
stances, and manners, the effects of it are so different, whimsical, 
surprising, and unaccountable. 

It is this passion that makes jealousy so troublesome and the 
envy of it often so fatal; those who imagine that there may be 
jealousy without love do not understand that passion. Men may 
not have the least affection for their wives and yet be angry with 
them for their conduct, and suspicious of them either with or 
without cause; but what in such cases affects them is their pride, 
the concern for their reputation. They feel a hatred against them 
without remorse; when they are outrageous, they can beat them 
and go to sleep contentedly: such husbands may watch their dames 
themselves, and have them observed by others; but their vigilance 
is not so intense; they are not so inquisitive or industrious in their 
searches, neither do they feel that anxiety of heart at the fear of 
a discovery as when love is mixed with the passions. 

What confirms me in this opinion is that we never observe this 
behaviour between a man and his mistress; for when his love is 
gone and he suspects her to be false, he leaves her and troubles 
his head no more about her; whereas it is the greatest difficulty 
imaginable even to a man of sense to part with his mistress as 
long as he loves her, whatever faults she may be guilty of. If in 
his anger he strikes her, he is uneasy after it; his love makes him 
reflect on the hurt he has done her, and he wants to be reconciled 
to her again. He may talk of hating her, and many times from his 
heart wish her hanged, but if he cannot get entirely rid of his 
frailty, he can never disentangle himself from her; though she is 
represented in the most monstrous guilt to his imagination, and 
he has resolved and swore a thousand times never to come near 
her again, there is no trusting him, even when he is fully con- 
vinced of her infidelity; if his love continues, his despair is never 
so lasting, but between the blackest fits of it he relents and finds 
lucid intervals of hope; he forms excuses for her, thinks of par- 
doning, and in order to [do] it racks his invention for possibilities 

that may make her appear less criminal. 

* * * * 

Line 200. Real pleasures, comforts, ease. 

That the highest good consisted in pleasure was the doctrine of 



104 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Epicurus, who yet led a life exemplary for continence, sobriety, 
and other virtues, which made people of the succeeding ages quar- 
rel about the signification of pleasure. Those who argued from 
the temperance of the philosopher said that the delight Epicurus 
meant was being virtuous; so Erasmus in his Colloquies tells us 
that there are no greater Epicures than pious Christians. Others 
that reflected on the dissolute manners of the greatest part of his 
followers would have it that by pleasures he could have understood 
nothing but sensual ones and the gratification of our passions. 
I shall not decide their quarrel, but am of opinion that, whether 
men be good or bad, what they take delight in is their pleasure; 
and not to look out for any further etymology from the learned 
languages, I believe an Englishman may justly call everything a 
pleasure that pleases him, and according to this definition, we 
ought to dispute no more about men's pleasures than their tastes: 
Trahit sua quemque voluptas.* 

The worldly-minded, voluptuous, and ambitious man, notwith- 
standing he is void of merit, covets precedence everywhere and 
desires to be dignified above his betters. He aims at spacious 
palaces and delicious gardens; his chief delight is in excelling 
others, in stately horses, magnificent coaches, a numerous attend- 
ance, and dear-bought furniture. To gratify his lust, he wishes for 
genteel, young, beautiful women of different charms and com- 
plexions that shall adore his greatness, and be really in love with 
his person. His cellars he would have stored with the flower of 
every country that produces excellent wines; his table he desires 
may be served with many courses, and each of them contain a 
choice variety of dainties not easily purchased, and ample evidences 
of elaborate and judicious cookery; while harmonious music and 
well-couched flattery entertain his hearing by turns. He employs, 
even in the meanest trifles, none but the ablest and most ingenious 
workmen, that his judgment and fancy may as evidently appear in 
the least things that belong to him as his wealth and quality are 
manifested in those of greater value. He desires to have several 
sets of witty, facetious, and polite people to converse with, and 
among them he would have some famous for learning and uni- 
versal knowledge; for his serious affairs, he wishes to find men 



* Virgil, Eclogues, II, 65: Each pursues his own desire. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 105 

of parts and experience, that should be diligent and faithful. Those 
that are to wait on him he would have handy, mannerly, and dis- 
creet, of comely aspect, and a graceful mien: what he requires in 
them besides, is a respectful care of everything that is his, nimble- 
ness without hurry, dispatch without noise, and an unlimited 
obedience to his orders. Nothing he thinks more troublesome than 
speaking to servants; wherefore he will only be attended by such, 
as by observing his looks have learned to interpret his will from 
his slightest motions. He loves to see an elegant nicety in every- 
thing that approaches him, and in what is to be employed about 
his person he desires a superlative cleanliness to be religiously 
observed. The chief officers of his household he would have to be 
men of birth, honour and distinction, as well as order, contrivance, 
and economy; for though he loves to be honoured by everybody, 
and receives the respects of the common people with joy, yet the 
homage that is paid him by persons of quality is ravishing to him 
in a more transcendent manner. 

While thus wallowing in a sea of lust and vanity, he is wholly 
employed in provoking and indulging his appetites, he desires the 
world should think him altogether free from pride and sensuality, 
and put a favourable construction upon his most glaring vices: nay, 
if his authority can purchase it, he covets to be thought wise, brave, 
generous, good-natured, and endued with the virtues he thinks 
worth having. He would have us believe that the pomp and luxury 
he is served with are as many tiresome plagues to him; and all the 
grandeur he appears in is an ungrateful burden, which, to his 
sorrow, is inseparable from the high sphere he moves in; that his 
noble mind, so much exalted above vulgar capacities, aims at higher 
ends and cannot relish such worthless enjoyments; that the high- 
est of his ambition is to promote the public welfare, and his great- 
est pleasure to see his country flourish, and everybody in it made 
happy. These are called real pleasures by the vicious and earthly- 
minded, and whoever is able, either by his skill or fortune, after 
this refined manner at once to enjoy the world and the good opinion 
of it, is counted extremely happy by all the most fashionable part 
of the people. 

But, on the other side, most of the ancient philosophers and 
grave moralists, especially the Stoics, would not allow anything 
to be a real good that was liable to be taken from them by others. 



106 FABLE OF THE BEES 

They wisely considered the instability of fortune and the favour of 
princes, the vanity of honour and popular applause, the precarious- 
ness of riches and all earthly possessions, and therefore placed true 
happiness in the calm serenity of a contented mind free from guilt 
and ambition; a mind that, having subdued every sensual appetite, 
despises the smiles as well as frowns of fortune, and taking no 
delight but in contemplation, desires nothing but what everybody 
is able to give to himself: a mind that, armed with fortitude and 
resolution, has learned to sustain the greatest losses without con- 
cern, to endure pain without affliction, and to bear injuries without 
resentment. Many have owned themselves arrived to this height 
of self-denial, and then, if we may believe them, they were raised 
above common mortals, and their strength extended vastly beyond 
the pitch of their first nature. They could behold the anger of 
threatening tyrants and the most imminent dangers without terror, 
and preserved their tranquillity in the midst of torments; death 
itself they could meet with intrepidity, and left the world with no 
greater reluctance than they had showed fondness at their entrance 
into it. 

These among the ancients have always bore the greatest sway; 
yet others that were no fools neither, have exploded those precepts 
as impracticable, called their notions romantic, and endeavoured 
to prove that what these Stoics asserted of themselves exceeded all 
human force and possibility, and that therefore the virtues they 
boasted of could be nothing but haughty pretence, full of arrogance 
and hypocrisy; yet notwithstanding these censures, the serious part 
of the world, and the generality of wise men that have lived ever 
since to this day, agree with the Stoics in the most material points; 
as that there can be no true felicity in what depends on things 
perishable; that peace within is the greatest blessing, and no con- 
quest like that of our passions; that knowledge, temperance, forti- 
tude, humility, and other embellishments of the mind are the 
most valuable acquisitions; that no man can be happy but he that 
is good: and that the virtuous are only capable of enjoying real 
pleasures. 

I expect to be asked why in the fable I have called those pleasures 
real that are directly opposite to those which I own the wise men 
of all ages have extolled as the most valuable? My answer is, 
because I do not call things pleasures which men say are best, 



FABLE OF THE BEES 107 

but such as they seem to be most pleased with; how can I believe 
that a man's chief delight is in the embellishment of the mind 
when I see him ever employed about and daily pursue the pleas- 
ures that are contrary to them? John never cuts any pudding, but 
just enough that you cannot say he took none; this little bit, after 
much chomping and chewing, you see goes down with him like 
chopped hay; after that he falls upon the beef with a voracious 
appetite and crams himself up to his throat. Is it not provoking to 
hear John cry every day that pudding is all his delight and that 
he does not value the beef of a farthing? 

I could swagger about fortitude and the contempt of riches as 
much as Seneca himself and would undertake to write twice as 
much in behalf of poverty as ever he did; for the tenth part of 
his estate, I could teach the way to his summum bonum as exactly 
as I know my way home. I could tell people to extricate themselves 
from all worldly engagements, and to purify the mind, they must 
divest themselves of their passions, as men take out the furniture 
when they would clean a room thoroughly; and I am clearly of 
the opinion that the malice and most severe strokes of fortune can 
do no more injury to a mind thus stripped of all fears, wishes, and 
inclinations, than a blind horse can do in an empty barn. In the 
theory of all this I am very perfect, but the practice is very difficult; 
and if you went about picking my pocket, offered to take the 
victuals from before me when I am hungry, or made but the least 
motion of spitting in my face, I dare not promise how philosophi- 
cally I should behave myself. But that I am forced to submit to 
every caprice of my unruly nature, you will say, is no argument that 
others are as little masters of theirs, and therefore I am willing to 
pay adoration to virtue whenever I can meet with it, with a 
proviso that I shall not be obliged to admit any as such where I can 
see no self-denial, or to judge of men's sentiments from their words 
where I have their lives before me. . . . 

... if virtue was the chief delight of great men, why should their 
extravagance be extended to things not understood by the mob 
and wholly removed from public view, I mean their private diver- 
sions, the pomp and luxury of the dining-room and the bed- 
chamber, and the curiosities of the closet? Few of the vulgar 
know that there is wine of a guinea the bottle, that birds no bigger 
than larks are often sold for half-a-guinea a-piece, or that a single 



108 FABLE OF THE BEES 

picture may be worth several thousand pounds; besides, is it to 
be imagined that unless it was to please their own appetites, men 
should put themselves to such vast expenses for a political show 
and be so solicitous to gain the esteem of those whom they so 
much despise in everything else? If we allow that the splendor 
and all the elegancy of a court are insipid, and only tiresome to the 
prince himself, and are altogether made use of to preserve royal 
majesty from contempt, can we say the same of hah* a dozen 
illegitimate children, most of them the offspring of adultery by 
the same majesty, got, educated, and made princes at the expense 
of the nation? Therefore, it is evident that this awing of the mul- 
titude by a distinguished manner of living is only a cloak and 
pretense, under which great men would shelter their vanity and 
indulge every appetite about them without reproach. 

A burgomaster of Amsterdam in his plain black suit, followed 
perhaps by one footman, is fully as much respected and better 
obeyed than a lord mayor of London with all his splendid equip- 
age and great train of attendance. Where there is a real power, it 
is ridiculous to think that any temperance or austerity of life 
should ever render the person in whom that power is lodged con- 
temptible in his office, from an emperor to the beadle of a parish. 
Cato, in his government of Spain, in which he acquitted himself 
with so much glory, had only three servants to attend him; do 
we hear that any of his orders were ever slighted for this, not- 
withstanding that he loved his bottle? And when that great man 
marched on foot through the scorching sands of Libya, and parched 
up with thirst, refused to touch the water that was brought him 
before all his soldiers had drank, do we ever read that this heroic 
forbearance weakened his authority or lessened him in the esteem 
of his army? But what need we go so far off? There has not, for 
these many ages, been a prince less inclined to pomp and luxury 
than the present king of Sweden [Charles XII], who, enamoured 
with the title of hero, has not only sacrificed the lives of his sub- 
jects and welfare of his dominions, but (what is more uncommon 
in sovereigns) his own ease and all the comforts of life, to an 
implacable spirit of revenge; yet he is obeyed to the ruin of his 
'people, in obstinately maintaining a war that has almost utterly 
destroyed his kingdom. 

Thus I have proved that the real pleasures of all men in nature 



FABLE OF THE BEES 109 

are worldly and sensual, if we judge from their practice; I say all 
men in nature because devout Christians, who alone are to be 
excepted here being regenerated and preternaturally assisted by the 
Divine grace, cannot be said to be in nature. How strange it is they 
should all so unanimously deny it! Ask not only the divines and 
moralists of every nation, but likewise all that are rich and power- 
ful, about real pleasure, and they will tell you, with the Stoics, 
that there can be no true felicity in things mundane and corrupti- 
ble: but then look upon their lives, and you will find they take 
delight in no other. 

What must we do in this dilemma? Shall we be so uncharitable, 
as judging from men's actions, to say that all the world pre- 
varicates and that this is not their opinion, let them talk what 
they will? Or shall we be so silly, as relying on what they say, to 
think them sincere in their sentiments and so not believe our own 
eyes? Or shall we rather endeavour to believe ourselves and them 
too, and say with Montaigne that they imagine and are fully per- 
suaded that they believe what they do not believe? These are his 
words: "Some impose on the world and would be thought to 
believe what they really do not: but much the greater number 
impose upon themselves, not considering, nor thoroughly appre- 
hending what it is to believe." But this is making all mankind 
either fools or imposters, which, to avoid, there is nothing left 
us but to say what Mr. Bayle has endeavoured to prove at large 
in his Reflections on Comets: "that man is so unaccountable a 
creature as to act most commonly against his principle"; and this 
is so far from being injurious that it is a compliment to human 
nature, for we must say either this or worse. 

This contradiction in the frame of man is the reason that the 
theory of virtue is so well understood and the practice of it so 
rarely to be met with. If you ask me where to look for those beau- 
tiful shining qualities of prime ministers and the great favourites 
of princes that are so finely painted in dedications, addresses, 
epitaphs, funeral sermons, and inscriptions, I answer, there, and 
nowhere else. Where would you look for the excellency of a 
statue, but in that part which you see of it? It is the polished 
outside only that has the skill and labour of the sculptor to boast 
of; what is out of sight is untouched. Would you break the head 
or cut open the breast to look for the brains or the heart, you 



110 FABLE OF THE BEES 

would only show your ignorance and destroy the workmanship. 
This has often made me compare the virtues of great men to your 
large China jars: they make a fine show, and are ornamental even 
to a chimney; one would, by the bulk they appear in and the 
value that is set upon them, think they might be very useful, but 
look into a thousand of them, and you will find nothing in them 
but dust and cobwebs. 



Line 201 The very poor 

Liv'd better than the rich before. 

If we trace the most flourishing nations in their origin, we shall 
find, that in the remote beginnings of every society, the richest 
and most considerable men among them were a great while desti- 
tute of a great many comforts of life that are now enjoyed by the 
meanest and most humble wretches: so that many things were 
once looked upon as the invention of luxury, are now allowed, 
even to those that are so miserably poor as to become the objects 
of public charity, nay, counted so necessary, that we think no 
human creature ought to want them. 

In the first ages, man, without doubt, fed on the fruits of the 
earth without any previous preparation, and reposed himself naked 
like other animals on the lap of their common parent. Whatever 
has contributed since to make life more comfortable, as it must 
have been the result of thought, experience, and some labour, 
so it more or less deserves the name of luxury, the more or less 
trouble it required, and deviated from the primitive simplicity. 
Our admiration is extended no farther than to what is new to us 
and we all overlook the excellency of things we are used to, be 
they never so curious. A man would be laughed at, that should 
discover luxury in the plain dress of a poor creature that walks 
along in a thick parish gown, and a coarse shirt underneath it; 
and yet what a number of people, how many different trades, and 
what a variety of skill and tools must be employed to have the 
most ordinary Yorkshire cloth? What depth of thought and in- 
genuity, what toil and labour, and what length of time must it 
have cost before man could learn from a seed, to raise and pre- 
pare so useful a product as linen. 

Must that society not be vainly curious, among whom this 



FABLE OF THE BEES 111 

admirable commodity, after it is made, shall not be thought fit 
to be used even by the poorest of all before it is brought to a 
perfect whiteness, which is not to be procured but by the assistance 
of all the elements, joined to a world of industry and patience? 
I have not done yet: can we reflect not only on the cost laid out 
upon this luxurious invention, but likewise on the little time the 
whiteness of it continues, in which part of its beauty consists, 
that every six or seven days at farthest it wants cleaning, and 
while it lasts is a continual charge to the wearer; can we, I say, 
reflect on all this and not think it an extravagant piece of nicety 
that even those who receive alms of the parish should not only 
have whole garments made of this operose manufacture, but like- 
wise that as soon as they are soiled, to restore them to their 
pristine purity, they should make use of one of the most judicious 
as well as difficult compositions that chemistry can boast of; with 
which, dissolved in water by the help of fire, the most detersive 
and yet innocent lixivium* is prepared that human industry has 
hitherto been able to invent? 

It is certain, time was that the things I speak of would have 
bore those lofty expressions, and in which everybody would have 
reasoned after the same manner; but the age we live in would 
call a man fool who should talk of extravagance and nicety if he 
saw a poor woman, after having wore her crown cloth smock a 
whole week, wash it with a bit of stinking soap of a groat a pound. 

The arts of brewing and making bread have by slow degrees 
been -brought to the perfection they now are in, but to have in- 
vented them at once, and a priori, would have required more 
knowledge and a deeper insight into the nature of fermentation 
than the greatest philosopher has hitherto been endowed with; 
yet the fruits of both are now enjoyed by the meanest of our 
species, and a starving wretch knows not how to make a more 
humble or a more modest petition than by asking for a bit of 
bread or a draught of small beer. 

Man has learned by experience that nothing was softer than 
the small plumes and down of birds, and found that heaped 
together, they would by their elasticity gently resist any incumbent 
weight and heave up again of themselves as soon as the pressure 



*lixivium cleanser; literally, lye or a solution containing lye. 



112 FABLE OF THE BEES 

is over. To make use of them to sleep upon was, no doubt, first 
invented to compliment the vanity as well as ease of the wealthy 
and potent; but they are long since become so common that 
almost everybody lies upon featherbeds, and to substitute flocks* 
in the room of them is counted a miserable shift of the most 
necessitous. What a vast height must luxury have been arrived 
to before it could be reckoned a hardship to repose upon the soft 
wool of animals! 

From caves, huts, hovels, tents, and barracks, with which man- 
kind took up at first, we are come to warm and well-wrought 
houses, and the meanest habitations to be seen in cities are regu- 
lar buildings, contrived by persons skilled in proportions and 
architecture. If the ancient Britons and Gauls should come out 
of their graves, with what amazement would they gaze on the 
mighty structures everywhere raised for the poor! Should they 
behold the magnificence of a Chelsea-College, a Greenwich- 
Hospital, or what surpasses all them, a Des Invalides at Paris, and 
see the care, the plenty, the superfluities and pomp, which people 
that have no possessions at all are treated with in those stately 
palaces, those who were once the greatest and richest of the land 
would have reason to envy the most reduced of our species now. 

Another piece of luxury the poor enjoy, that is not looked upon 
as such and which there is no doubt but the wealthiest in a 
golden age would abstain from, is their making use of the flesh 
of animals to eat. In what concerns the fashions and manners of 
the ages men live in, they never examine into the real worth or 
merit of the cause and generally judge of things not as their reason 
but custom direct them. Time was when the funeral rites in the 
disposing of the dead were performed by fire and the cadavers of 
the greatest emperors were burnt to ashes. Then, burying the corpse 
in the ground was a funeral for slaves or made a punishment for 
the worst of malefactors. Now nothing is decent or honourable 
but interring; and burning the body is reserved for crimes of the 
blackest dye. At some times we look upon trifles with horror, at 
other times we can behold enormities without concern. If we see 
a man walk with his hat on in a church, though out of service 



*flocks material consisting of coarse tufts and refuse of wool or 
cotton. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 113 

time, it shocks us; but if on a Sunday night we meet half a dozen 
fellows drunk in the street, the sight makes little or no impression 
upon us. If a woman at a merry-making dresses in man's clothes, 
it is reckoned a frolic amongst friends, and he that finds too much 
fault with it is counted censorious; ujxm the stage it is done with- 
out reproach, and the most virtuous ladies will dispense with it 
hi an actress, though everybody has a full view of her legs and 
thighs; but if the same woman, as soon as she has petticoats on 
again, should show her leg to a man as high as her knee, it would 
be a very immodest action, and everybody will call her impudent 
for it. 

I have often thought, if it was not for this tyranny which cus- 
tom usurps over us, that men of any tolerable good-nature could 
never be reconciled to the killing of so many animals for their 
daily food, as long as the bountiful earth so plentifully provides 
them with varieties of vegetable dainties. I know that reason 
excites our compassion but faintly, and therefore I would not 
wonder how men should so little commiserate such imperfect 
creatures as crayfish, oysters, cockles, and indeed all fish in gen- 
eral; as they are mute and their inward formation, as well as 
outward figure [is] vastly different from ours, they express them- 
selves unintelligibly to us, and therefore it is not strange that 
their grief should not affect our understanding which it cannot 
reach; for nothing stirs us to pity so effectually as when the symp- 
toms of misery strike immediately upon our senses, and I have 
seen people moved at the noise a live lobster makes upon the 
spit, that could have killed half a dozen fowls with pleasure. But 
in such perfect animals as sheep and oxen, in whom the heart, 
the brain and nerves differ so little from ours, and in whom the 
separation of the spirits from the blood, the organs of sense, and 
consequently feeling itself, are the same as they are in human 
creatures; I cannot imagine how a man not hardened in blood and 
massacre is able to see a violent death, and the pangs of it, with- 
out concern. 

In answer to this, most people will think it sufficient to say 
that all things being allowed to be made for the service of man, 
there can be no cruelty in putting creatures to the use they were 
designed for; but I have heard men make this reply while thek 
nature within them has reproached them with the falsehood of 



114 FABLE OF THE BEES 

the assertion. There is of all the multitude not one man hi ten 
but what will own (if he was not brought up hi a slaughter-house) 
that of all trades he could never have been a butcher; and I ques- 
tion whether ever anybody so much as killed a chicken without 
reluctancy the first time. Sojne people are not to be persuaded 
to taste of any creatures they have daily seen and been acquainted 
with while they were alive; others extend their scruple no further 
than to their own poultry and refuse to eat what they fed and 
took care of themselves; yet all of them will feed heartily and 
without remorse on beef, mutton, and fowls when they are bought 
in the market. In this behaviour, methinks, there appears some- 
thing like a consciousness of guilt, it looks as if they endeavoured 
to save themselves from the imputation of a crime (which they 
know sticks somewhere) by removing the cause of it as far as 
they can from themselves; and I can discover in it some strong 
remains of primitive pity and innocence, which all the arbitrary 
power of custom and the violence of luxury have not yet been 
able to conquer. 

What I build upon I shall be told is a folly that wise men are 
not guilty of: I own it; but while it proceeds from a real passion 
inherent in our nature, it is sufficient to demonstrate that we are 
born with a repugnancy to the killing, and consequently the eating, 
of animals; for it is impossible that a natural appetite should ever 
prompt us to act or desire others to do what we have an aversion 
to, be it as foolish as it will. 

Everybody knows that surgeons in the cure of dangerous wounds 
and fractures, the extirpation of limbs, and other dreadful opera- 
tions, are often compelled to put their patients to extraordinary 
torments, and that the more desperate and calamitous cases occur 
to them, the more the outcries and bodily sufferings of others must 
become familiar to them; for this reason, our English law, out 
of a most affectionate regard to the lives of the subject, allows 
them not to be of any jury upon life and death, as supposing 
that their practice itself is sufficient to harden and extinguish in 
them that tenderness without which no man is capable of setting 
a true value upon the lives of his fellow-creatures. Now, if we 
ought to have no concern for what we do to brute beasts, and 
there was not imagined to be any cruelty in killing them, why 



FABLE OF THE BEES 115 

should of all callings butchers, and only they, jointly with sur- 
geons, be excluded from being jurymen by the same law? 

I shall urge nothing of what Pythagoras and many other wise 
men have said concerning this barbarity of eating flesh; I have 
gone too much out of my way already and shall therefore beg the 
reader if he would have any more of this to run over the follow- 
ing fable, or else, if he be tired, to let it alone, with an assurance 
that in doing of either he shall equally oblige me. 

A Roman merchant in one of the Carthaginian wars was cast 
away upon the coast of Afric; himself and his slave with great 
difficulty got safe ashore; but going in quest of relief were met 
by a lion of a mighty size. It happened to be one of the breed 
that ranged 'in Aesop's days, and one that could not only speak 
several languages, but seemed, moreover, very well acquainted 
with human affairs. The slave got upon a tree, but his master not 
thinking himself safe there and having heard much of the gen- 
erosity of lions, fell down prostrate before him with all the signs 
of fear and submission. The lion who had lately filled his belly, 
bids him rise and for a while lay by his fears, assuring him withal 
that he should not be touched if he could give him any tolerable 
reasons why he should not be devoured. The merchant obeyed; 
and having now received some glimmering hopes of safety, gave a 
dismal account of the shipwreck he had suffered, and endeavouring 
from thence to raise the lion's pity, pleaded his cause with abun- 
dance of good rhetoric; but observing by the countenance of the 
beast that flattery and fine words made very little impression, he 
betook himself to arguments of greater solidity, and reasoning 
from the excellency of man's nature and abilities, remonstrated 
how improbable it was that the gods should not have designed 
him for a better use than to be eat* by savage beasts. Upon this 
the lion became more attentive and vouchsafed now and then a 
reply, till at last the following dialogue ensued between them. 

Oh vain and covetous animal (said the lion), whose pride and 
avarice can make him leave his native soil, where his natural wants 
might be plentifully supplied, and try rough seas and dangerous 
mountains to find out superfluities, why should you esteem your 



*eat eaten (pronounced et). 



116 FABLE OF THE BEES 

species above ours? And if the gods have given you a superiority 
over all creatures, then why beg you of an inferior? Our superiority 
(answered the merchant) consists not in bodily force, but strength 
of understanding; the gods have endued us with a rational soul, 
which, though invisible, is much the better part of us. I desire to 
touch nothing of you but what is good to eat; but why do you 
value yourself so much upon that part which is invisible? Because 
it is immortal, and shall meet with rewards after death for the 
actions of this life, and the just shall enjoy eternal bliss and tran- 
quillity with the heroes and demi-gods in the Elysian fields. What 
life have you led? I have honoured the gods, and studied to be 
beneficial to man. Then why do you fear death if you think the 
gods as just as you have been? I have a wife and five small chil- 
dren that must come to want if they lose me. I have two whelps 
that are not big enough to shift for themselves that are in want 
now and must actually be starved if I can provide nothing for 
them. Your children will be provided for one way or other; at least 
as well when I have eat you, as if you had been drowned. 

As to the excellency of either species, the value of things among 
you has ever increased with the scarcity of them, and to a million 
of men there is hardly one lion; besides that, in the great venera- 
tion man pretends to have for his kind, there is little sincerity 
farther than it concerns the share which everyone's pride has in 
it for himself; it is a folly to boast of the tenderness shown and 
attendance given to your young ones, or the excessive and lasting 
trouble bestowed in the education of them. Man being born the 
most necessitous and most helpless animal, this is only an instinct 
of nature, which, in all creatures, has ever proportioned the care 
of the parents to the wants and imbecillities of the offspring. But 
if a man had a real value for his kind, how is it possible that often 
ten thousand of them, and sometimes ten times as many, should 
be destroyed in few hours for the caprice of two? All degrees of 
men despise those that are inferior to them; and if you could 
enter into the hearts of kings and princes, you would hardly find 
any but what have less value for the greatest part of the multitudes 
they rule over than those have for the cattle that belong to them. 
Why should so many pretend to derive their race, though but 
spuriously, from the immortal gods; why should all of them 
suffer others to kneel down before them and more or less take 



FABLE OF THE BEES 117 

delight in having divine honours paid them, but to insinuate that 
themselves are of a more exalted nature and a species superior to 
that of their subjects? 

Savage I am, but no creature can be called cruel but what 
either by malice or insensibility extinguishes his natural pity. The 
lion was born without compassion; we follow the instinct of our 
nature; the gods have appointed us to live upon the waste and 
spoil of other animals, and as long as we can meet with dead 
ones, we never hunt after the living. It is only man, mischievous 
man, that can make death a sport. Nature taught your stomach 
to crave nothing but vegetables; but your violent fondness to 
change and great eagerness after novelties have prompted you to 
the destruction of animals without justice or necessity, perverted 
your nature, and warped your appetites which way soever your 
pride or luxury have called them. The lion has a ferment within 
him that consumes the toughest skin and hardest bones, as well 
as the flesh of all animals without exception; your squeamish 
stomach, in which the digestive heat is weak and inconsiderable, 
will not so much as admit of the most tender parts of them, unless 
above half the concoction has been performed by artificial fire 
before hand; and yet what animal have you spared to satisfy the 
caprices of a languid appetite? Languid I say; for what is man's 
hunger if compared to the lion's? Yours, when it is at the worst, 
makes you faint; mine makes me mad. Oft have I tried with roots 
and herbs to allay the violence of it, but in vain; nothing but large 
quantities of flesh can anywise appease it. 

Yet the fierceness of our hunger notwithstanding, lions have 
often requited benefits received; but ungrateful and perfidious man 
feeds on the sheep that clothes him and spares not her innocent 
young ones, whom he has taken into his care and custody. If you 
tell me the gods made man master over all other creatures, what 
tyranny was it then to destroy them out of wantonness? No, fickle, 
timorous animal, the gods have made you for society and designed 
that millions of you, when well joined together, should compose 
the strong Leviathan*. A single lion bears some sway in the crea- 
tion, but what is single man? A small and inconsiderable part, 



*Leviathan the national state, especially the state as described by 
Thomas Hobbes in his Leviathan (1651). 



118 FABLE OF THE BEES 

a trifling atom of one great beast. What nature designs, she exe- 
cutes; and it is not safe to judge of what she purposed but from 
the effects she shows. If she had intended that man, as man from 
a superiority of species, should lord it over all other animals, the 
tiger, nay, the whale and eagle, would have obeyed his voice. 

But if your wit and understanding exceeds ours, ought not the 
lion, in deference to that superiority, to follow the maxims of men, 
with whom nothing is more sacred than that the reason of the 
strongest is ever the most prevalent? Whole multitudes of you 
have conspired and compassed the destruction of one, after they 
had owned the gods had made him their superior; and one has 
often ruined and cut off whole multitudes, whom, by the same 
gods, he had sworn to defend and maintain. Man never acknowl- 
edged superiority without power, and why should I? The excellence 
I boast of is visible, all animals tremble at the sight of the lion, 
not out of panic fear. The gods have given me swiftness to over- 
take and strength to conquer whatever comes near me. Where is 
there a creature that has teeth and claws like mine, behold the 
thickness of these massy jawbones, consider the width of them, 
and feel the firmness of this brawny neck. The nimblest deer, the 
wildest^ boar, the stoutest horse, and strongest bull are my prey 
wherever I meet them. Thus spoke the lion, and the merchant 
fainted away. 

The lion, in my opinion, has stretched the point too far; yet, 
when to soften the flesh of male animals we have by castration 
prevented the firmness of their tendons and every fiber would 
have come to without it, I confess I think it ought to move a human 
creature, when he reflects upon the cruel care with which they 
are fattened for destruction. When a large and gentle bullock, 
after having resisted a ten times greater force of blows than would 
have killed his murderer, falls stunned at last and his armed head 
is fastened to the ground with cords; as soon as the wide wound is 
made and the jugulars are cut asunder, what mortal can, without 
compassion, hear the painful bellowings intercepted by his blood, 
the bitter sighs that speak the sharpness of his anguish, and the 
deep sounding groans, with loud anxiety, fetched from the bottom 
of his strong palpitating heart; look on the trembling and violent 
convulsion of his limbs; see, while his reeking gore streams from 
him, his eyes become dim and languid, and behold his strugglings, 



FABLE OF THE BEES 119 

gasps and last efforts for life, the certain signs of his approaching 
fate? When a creature has given such convincing and undeniable 
proofs of the terrors upon him and the pains and agonies he feels, 
is there a follower of Descartes so inured to blood as not to refute 

by his commiseration the philosophy of the vain reasoner?* 

* * * * 

Line 307 For frugally 

They now liv'd on their salary. 

When people have small comings in and are honest withal, it is 
then that the generality of them begin to be frugal, and not before. 
Frugality in ethics is called that virtue from the principle of which 
men abstain from superfluities and, despising the operose contriv- 
ances of art to procure either case of pleasure, content themselves 
with the natural simplicity of things and are carefully tem- 
perate in the enjoyment of them, without any tincture of covetous- 
ness. Frugality thus limited is perhaps scarcer than many may 
imagine; but what is generally understood by it is a quality more 
often to be met with, and consists in a medium between profuse- 
ness and avarice, rather leaning to the latter. As this prudent 
economy, which some people call saving, is in private families 
the most certain method to increase an estate, so some imagine 
that whether a country be barren or fruitful, the same method, if 
generally pursued (which they think practicable), will have the 
same effect upon a whole nation, and that, for example, the 
English might be much richer than they are if they would be as 
frugal as some of their neighbors. This, I think, is an error which 
to prove I shall first refer the reader to what has been said upon 
this head in Remark on 1. 180 [pp. 77 ff.] and then go on thus. 

Experience teaches us first that as people differ in their views 
and perceptions of things, so they vary in their inclinations; one 
man is given to covetousness, another to prodigality, and a third 
is only saving. Secondly, that men are never, or at least, very 
seldom, reclaimed from their darling passions, either by reason or 
precept, and that if anything ever draws them from what they are 



*Descartes Having postulated the complete separation of the ma- 
terial from the immaterial, of body from mind and soul, Descartes 
argued that animals are mechanical bodies, devoid of consciousness, 
feeling and reason. 



120 FABLE OF THE BEES 

naturally prepense to, it must be a change in their circumstances 
or their fortunes. If we reflect upon these observations, we shall 
find that to render the generality of a nation lavish, the product 
of the country must be considerable in proportion to the inhab- 
itants, and what they are profuse of cheap; that, on the contrary, 
to make a nation generally frugal, the necessaries of life must be 
scarce, and consequently dear; and that, therefore, let the best 
politician do what he can, the profuseness or frugality of a people 
in general must always depend upon and will, in spite of his teeth, 
be ever proportioned to the fruitfulness and product of the coun- 
try, the number of inhabitants, and the taxes they are to bear. 
If anybody would refute what I have said, let them only prove 
from history that there ever was in any country a national frugality 
without a national necessity. 

Let us examine then what things are requisite to aggrandize 
and enrich a nation. The first desirable blessings for any society 
of men are a fertile soil, and a happy climate, a mild government, 
and more land than people. These things will render man easy, 
loving, honest, and sincere. In this condition they may be as vir- 
tuous as they can, without the least injury to the public, and con- 
sequently as happy as they please among themselves. But they 
shall have no arts or sciences or be quiet longer than their neigh- 
bors will let them; they must be poor, ignorant, and almost wholly 
destitute of what we call the comforts of life, and all the cardinal 
virtues together would not so much as procure a tolerable coat or 
a porridge-pot among them; for in this state of slothful ease and 
stupid innocence, as you need not fear great vices, so you must 
not expect any considerable virtues. Man never exerts himself 
but when he is roused by his desires; while they lie dormant, and 
there is nothing to raise them, his excellence and abilities will be 
forever undiscovered, and the lumpish machine, without the in- 
fluence of his passions, may by justly compared to a huge wind- 
mill without a breath of air. 

Would you render a society of men strong and powerful, you 
must touch their passions. Divide the land, though there be never 
so much to spare, and their possessions will make them covetous; 
rouse them, though but in jest, from their idleness with praises, 
and pride will set them to work in earnest; teach them trades and 
handicrafts, and you will bring envy and emulation among them; 



FABLE OF THE BEES 121 

to increase their numbers, set up a variety of manufactures and 
leave no ground uncultivated; let property be inviolably secured 
and privileges equal to all men; suffer nobody to act but what is 
lawful and everybody to think what he pleases; for a country 
where everybody may be maintained that will be employed, and 
the other maxims are observed, must always be thronged and can 
never want people, as long as there is any in the world. Would 
you have them bold and warlike, turn to military discipline, make 
good use of their fear, and flatter their vanity with art and assidu- 
ity; but would you, moreover, render them an opulent, knowing, 
and polite nation, teach them commerce with foreign countries, 
and, if possible, get into the sea, which to compass spare no labour 
nor industry; and let no difficulty deter you from it; then promote 
navigation, cherish the merchant, and encourage trade in every 
branch of it; this will bring riches, and where they are, arts and 
sciences will soon follow; and by the help of what I have named 
and good management, it is that politicians can make a people 
potent, renowned, and flourishing. 

But would you have a frugal and honest society, the best policy 
is to preserve men in their native simplicity, strive not to increase 
their numbers; let them never be acquainted with strangers or 
superfluities, but remove and keep from them everything that 
might raise their desires or improve their understanding. 

Great wealth and foreign treasure will ever scorn to come among 
men, unless you will admit their inseparable companions, avarice 
andjuxury; where trade is considerable, fraud will intrude. To 
be at once well-bred and sincere is no less than a contradiction; 
and therefore, while man advances in knowledge and his manners 
are polished, we must expect to see, at the same time, his desires 
enlarged, his appetites refined, and his vices increased. 

The Dutch may ascribe their present grandeur to the virtue and 
frugality of their ancestors as they please; but what made that 
contemptible spot of ground so considerable among the principal 
powers of Europe has been their political wisdom in postponing 
everything to merchandise and navigation, the unlimited liberty 
of conscience that is enjoyed among them, and the unwearied 
application with which they have always made use of the most 

effectual means to encourage and increase trade in general. 

* * * * 



122 FABLE OF THE BEES 

To convince the champions for national frugality by another 
argument that what they urge is impracticable, we will suppose 
that I am mistaken in everything which in Remark, 1. 180, I have 
said in behalf of luxury and the necessity of it to maintain trade; 
after that let us examine what a general frugality, if it was by art 
and management to be forced upon people, whether they have 
occasion for it or not, would produce in such nations as ours. We 
will grant, then, that all the people in Great Britain shall consume 
but four-fifths of what they do now and so lay by one-fifth part 
of their income; I shall not speak of what influence this would 
have upon almost every trade, as well as the farmer, the grazier, 
and the landlord, but favourably suppose (what is yet impossible) 
that the same work shall be done, and consequently the same 
handicrafts be employed as there are now. The consequence would 
be that unless money should all at once fall prodigiously in value 
and everything else, contrary to reason, grow very dear, at the 
five years end all the working people and the poorest of labourers 
(for I would not meddle with any of the rest) would be worth in 
ready cash as much as they now spend in a whole year; which, 
by the bye, would be more money than ever the nation had at 
once.. 

Let us now, overjoyed with this increase of wealth, take a view 
of the condition the working people would be in, and, reasoning 
from experience and what we daily observe of them, judge what 
their behaviour would be in such a case. Everybody knows that 
there is a vast number of journeymen weavers, tailors, cloth- 
workers, and twenty other handicrafts, who, if by four days labour 
in a week they can maintain themselves, will hardly be persuaded 
to work the fifth; and that there are thousands of labouring men 
of all sorts, who will, though they can hardly subsist, put them- 
selves to fifty inconveniences, disoblige their masters, pinch their 
bellies, and run in debt to make holidays. When men show such 
extraordinary proclivity to idleness and pleasure, what reason have 
we to think that they would ever work unless they were obliged 
to it by immediate necessity? When we see an artificer that cannot 
be drove to his work before Tuesday because Monday morning he 
has two shillings left of his last week's pay, why should we imagine 
he would go to it at all if he had fifteen or twenty pounds in his 
pocket? 



FABLE OF THE BEES 123 

What would, at this rate, become of our manufactures? If the 
merchant would send cloth abroad, he must make it himself, for 
the clothier cannot get one man out of twelve that used to work 
for him. If what I speak of was only to befall the journeymen 
shoemakers and nobody else, in less than a twelvemonth half of 
us would go barefoot. The chief and most pressing use there is 
for money in a nation is to pay the labour of the poor, and when 
there is a real scarcity of it, those who have a great many workmen 
to pay will always feel it first; yet notwithstanding this great neces- 
sity of coin, it would be easier, where property was well secured, 
to live without money than without poor; for who would do the 
work? For this reason the quantity of circulating coin in a country 
ought always to be proportioned to the number of hands that are 
employed, and the wages of labourers to the price of provisions. 
From whence it is demonstrable that whatever procures plenty 
makes labourers cheap, where the poor are well managed; who 
as they ought to be kept from starving, so they should receive 
nothing worth saving. If here and there one of the lowest class 
by uncommon industry and pinching his belly lifts himself above 
the condition he was brought up in, nobody ought to hinder him; 
nay, it is undeniably the wisest course for* every person in the 
society and for every private family to be frugal; but it is the inter- 
est of all rich nations that the greatest part of the poor should 
almost never be idle and yet continually spend what they get. 

All men, as Sir William Temple observes very well, are more 
prone to ease and pleasure than they are to labour when they are 
not prompted to it by pride and avarice, and those that get their 
living by their daily labour are seldom powerfully influenced by 
either; so that they have nothing to stir them up to be serviceable 
but their wants, which it is prudence to relieve, but folly to cure. 
The only thing, then, that can render the labouring man indus- 
trious is a moderate quantity of money; for as too little will, 
according as his temper is, either dispirit or make him desperate, 
so too much will make him insolent and lazy. 

A man would be laughed at by most people who should maintain 
that too much money could undo a nation, yet this has been the 
fate of Spain; to this the learned Don Diego Saavedra ascribes 
the ruin of his country. The fruits of the earth in former ages had 
made Spain so rich that King Lewis XI of France being come to 



124 FABLE OF THE BEES 

the court of Toledo was astonished at its splendour and said that 
he had never seen anything to be compared to it, either in Europe 
or Asia; he that in his travels to the Holy Land had run through 
every province of them. In the kingdom of Castile alone (if we 
may believe some writers), there were for the holy war from all 
parts of the world got together one hundred thousand foot, ten 
thousand horse, and sixty thousand carriages for baggage, which 
Alfonso III maintained at his own charge and paid every day, as 
well soldiers as officers and princes, every one according to his 
rank and dignity; nay, down to the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella 
(who equipped Columbus) and some time after, Spain was a fer- 
tile country, where trade and manufactures flourished, and had 
a knowing industrious people to boast of. But as soon as that 
mighty treasure that was obtained with more hazard and cruelty 
than the world until then had known and which to come at, by the 
Spaniard's own confession, had cost the lives of twenty million 
of Indians; as soon, I say, as that ocean of treasure came rolling 
in upon them, it took away their senses, and their industry forsook 
them. The farmer left his plough, the mechanic his tools, the mer- 
chant his counting-house, and everybody scorning to work, took 
his pleasure and tunted gentleman. They thought they had reason 
to value themselves above all their neighbours, and now nothing but 
the conquest of the world would serve them. 

The consequence of this has been that other nations have sup- 
plied what their own sloth and pride denied them; and when 
everybody saw that notwithstanding all the prohibitions the gov- 
ernment could make against the exportation of bullion, the Span- 
iard would part with his money and bring it [to] you aboard himself 
at the hazard of his neck, all the world endeavoured to work for 
Spain. Gold and silver being by this means yearly divided and 
shared among all the trading countries have made all things dear 
and most nations of Europe industrious, except their owners, who, 
ever since their mighty acquisitions, sit with their arms across 
and wait every year with impatience and anxiety the arrival of 
their revenues from abroad to pay others for what they have spent 
already; and thus by too much money, the making of colonies 
and other mismanagements, of which it was the occasion, Spain 
is from a fruitful and well-peopled country, with all its mighty titles 
and possessions, made a barren and empty thoroughfare through 



FABLE OF THE BEES 125 

which gold and silver pass from America to the rest of the world; 
and the nation, from a rich, acute, diligent, and labourious, become 
a slow, idle, proud, and beggarly people. So much for Spain. The 
next country where money is called the product is Portugal, and 
the figure which that kingdom with all its gold makes in Europe, 
I think is not much to be envied. 

The great art then to make a nation happy and what we call 
flourishing consists in giving everybody an opportunity of being 
employed; which to compass, let a government's first care be to 
promote as great a variety of manufactures, arts, and handicrafts, 
as human wit can invent; and the second, to encourage agriculture 
and fishery in all their branches, that the whole earth may be 
forced to exert itself as well as man; for as the one is an infallible 
maxim to draw vast multitudes of people into a nation, so the other 
is the only method to maintain them. 

It is from this policy, and not the trifling regulations of lavish- 
ness and frugality (which will ever take their own course, accord- 
ing to the circumstances of the people), that the greatness and 
felicity of nations must be expected; for let the value of gold and 
silver either rise or fall, the enjoyment of all societies will ever 
depend upon the fruits of the earth and the labour of the people; 
both which joined together are a more certain, a more inexhausti- 
ble, and a more real treasure than the gold of Brazil or the silver 

of Potosi. 

* * * * 

Line 321. No honour now, &c. 

Honour in its figurative sense is a chimera without truth or 
being, an invention of moralists and politicians, and signifies a 
certain principle of virtue not related to religion, found hi some 
men that keeps them close to their duty and engagements what- 
ever they be; as for example, a man of honour enters into a con- 
spiracy with others to murder a king; he is obliged to go thorough 
stitch* with it; and if overcome by remorse or good nature, he 
startles at the enormity of his purpose, discovers the plot, and turns 
a witness against his accomplices; he then forfeits his honour, at 
least among the party he belonged to. The excellency of this prin- 



*thorough stitch wholeheartedly. 



126 FABLE OF THE BEES 

ciple is that the vulgar are destitute of it, and it is only to be met 
with in people of the better sort, as some oranges have kernels 
and others not, though the outside be the same. In great families 
it is like the gout, generally counted hereditary, and all lords' 
children are born with it. In some that never felt anything of it, 
it is acquired by conversation and reading (especially of ro- 
mances), in others by preferment; but there is nothing that 
encourages the growth of it more than a sword, and upon the first 
wearing of one, some people have felt considerable shoots of it in 
four and twenty hours. 

The chief and most important care a man of honour ought to 
have is the preservation of this principle, and rather than forfeit 
it, he must lose his employments and estate, nay, life itself; for 
which reason, whatever humility he may show by way of good- 
breeding, he is allowed to put an inestimable value upon himself 
as a possessor of this invisible ornament. The only method to 
preserve this principle is to live up to the rules of honour, which 
are laws he is to walk by; himself is obliged always to be faithful 
to his trust, to prefer the public interest to his own, not to tell 
lies, nor defraud or wrong anybody, and from others to suffer no 
affront, which is a term of art for every action designedly done 
to undervalue him. 

The men of ancient honour, of which I reckon Don Quixote to 
have been the last upon record, were very nice observers of all 
these laws, and a great many more than I have named; but the 
modems seem to be more remiss; they have a profound veneration 
for the last of them, but they pay not an equal obedience to any 
of the other; and whoever will but strictly comply with that I hint 
at shall have abundance of trespasses against all the rest con- 
nived at. 

A man of honour is always counted impartial, and a man of 
sense of course; for nobody ever heard of a man of honour that 
was a fool; for this reason, he has nothing to do with the law and 
is always allowed to be a judge in his own case; and if the least 
injury be done either to himself or his friend, his relation, his 
servant, his dog, or anything which he is pleased to take under his 
honourable protection, satisfaction must be forthwith demanded; 
and if it proves an affront and he that gave it likewise a man of 
honour, a battle must ensue. From all this it is evident that a man 



FABLE OF THE BEES 127 

of honour must be possessed of courage and that without it his 
other principle would be no more than a sword without a point. 
Let us, therefore, examine what courage consists in and whether 
it be, as most people will have it, a real something that valiant men 
have in their nature distinct from all their other qualities or not. 

There is nothing so universally sincere upon earth as the love 
which all creatures that are capable of any bear to themselves; 
and as there is no love but what implies a care to preserve the 
thing beloved, so there is nothing more sincere in any creature 
than his will, wishes, and endeavours to preserve himself. This is 
the law of nature, by which no creature is endued with any appetite 
or passion but what either directly or indirectly tends to the preser- 
vation either- of himself or his species. 

The means by which nature obliges every creature continually 
to stir in this business of self-preservation are grafted in him and 
(in man) called desires, which either compel him to crave what he 
thinks will sustain or please him, or command him to avoid what 
he imagines might displease, hurt, or destroy him. These desires 
or passions have all their different symptoms by which they mani- 
fest themselves to those they disturb, and from that variety of 
disturbances they make within us, their various denominations 
have been given them, -as has been shown already in pride and 
shame. 

The passion that is raised in us when we apprehend that mis- 
chief is approaching us is called fear: the disturbance it makes 
within us is always more or less violent in proportion, not of the 
danger, but our apprehension of the mischief dreaded, whether 
real or imaginary. Our fear then being always proportioned to 
the apprehension we have of the danger, it follows that while that 
apprehension lasts, a man can no more shake off his fear than he 
can a leg or an arm. In a fright, it is true, the apprehension of 
danger is so sudden and attacks us so lively (as sometimes to 
take away reason and senses), that when it is over we often do not 
remember that we had any apprehension at all; but from the event 
it is plain we had it, for how could we have been frightened if we 
had not apprehended that some evil or other was coming upon us? 

Most people are of opinion that this apprehension is to be con- 
quered by reason, but I confess I am not. Those that have been 
frightened will tell you that as soon as they could recollect them- 



128 FABLE OF THE BEES 

selves, that is, make use of their reason, their apprehension was 
conquered. But this is no conquest at all, for in a fright the danger 
was either altogether imaginary, or else it is past by that time 
they can make use of their reason; and therefore if they find there 
is no danger, it is no wonder that they should not apprehend any; 
but when the danger is permanent, let them then make use of their 
reason, and they will find that it may serve them to examine the 
greatness and reality of the danger and that, if they find it less 
than they imagined, the apprehension will be lessened accordingly; 
but, if the danger proves real and the same in every circumstance 
as they took it to be at first, then their reason, instead of diminish- 
ing, will rather increase their apprehension. While this fear lasts, 
no creature can fight offensively; and yet we see brutes daily fight 
obstinately and worry one another to death; so that some other 
passion must be able to overcome this fear, and the most contrary 
to it is anger, which to trace to the bottom I must beg leave to 
make another digression. 

No creature can subsist without food, nor any species of them 
(I speak of the more perfect animals) continue long unless young 
ones are continually born as fast as the old ones die. Therefore 
the first and fiercest appetite that nature has given them is hunger, 
the next is lust; the one prompting them to procreate, as the other 
bids them eat. Now, if we observe that anger is that passion which 
is raised in us when we are crossed or disturbed in our desires, and 
that, as it sums up all the strength in creatures, so it was given 
them that by it they might exert themselves more vigorously in 
endeavouring to remove, overcome, or destroy whatever obstructs 
them in the pursuit of self-preservation; we shall find that brutes, 
unless themselves or what they love or the liberty of either are 
threatened or attacked, have nothing worth notice that can move 
them to anger but hunger or lust. It is they that make them more 
fierce, for we must observe that the appetites of creatures are as 
actually crossed while they want and cannot meet with what they 
desire (though perhaps with less violence) as when hindered from 
enjoying what they have in view. What I have said will appear 
more plainly if we but mind what nobody can be ignorant of, 
which is this: all creatures upon earth live either upon the fruits 
and product of it, or else the flesh of other animals, their fellow- 
creatures. The latter, which we call beasts of prey, nature has 



FABLE OF THE BEES 129 

armed accordingly and given them weapons and strength to over- 
come and tear asunder those whom she has designed for their 
food, and likewise a much keener appetite than to other animals 
that live upon herbs, &c. For, as to the first, if a cow loved mutton 
as well as she does grass, being made as she is and having no 
claws or talons and but one row of teeth before that are all of 
an equal length, she would be starved even among a flock of sheep. 
Secondly, as to their voraciousness, if experience did not teach 
us, our reason might; in the first place, it is highly probable that 
the hunger which can make a creature fatigue, harass and expose 
himself to danger for every bit he eats is more piercing than that 
which only bids him eat what stands before him and which he 
may have for stooping down. In the second, it is to be considered 
that as beasts of prey have an instinct by which they learn to crave, 
trace, and discover those creatures that are good food for them, 
so the others have likewise an instinct that teaches them to shun, 
conceal themselves, and run away from those that hunt after them; 
from hence it must follow that beasts of prey, though they could 
almost eat forever, go yet more often with empty bellies than other 
creatures, whose victuals neither fly from nor oppose them. This 
must perpetuate as well as increase their hunger, which hereby 
becomes a constant fuel to their anger. 

If you ask me what stirs up this anger in bulls and cocks that 
will fight to death and yet are neither animals of prey nor very 
voracious, I answer, lust. Those creatures whose rage proceeds 
from hunger, both male and female, attack everything they can 
master and fight obstinately against all; but the animals whose 
fury is provoked by a venereal ferment, being generally males, 
exert themselves chiefly against other males of the same species. 
They may do mischief by chance to other creatures; but the main 
objects of their hatred are their rivals, and it is against them only 
that their prowess and fortitude are shown. We see likewise hi 
all those creatures, of which the male is able to satisfy a great 
number of females, a more considerable superiority hi the male, 
expressed by nature hi his make and features, as well as fierceness, 
than is observed hi other creatures, where the male is contented 
with one or two females. Dogs, though become domestic animals, 
are ravenous to a proverb, and those of them that will fight being 
carnivorous would soon become beasts of prey if not fed by us; 



130 FABLE OF THE BEES 

what we may observe in them is an ample proof of what I have 
hitherto advanced. Those of a true fighting breed, being voracious 
creatures, both male and female, will fasten upon anything and 
suffer themselves to be killed before they give over. As the female 
is rather more salacious than the male, so there is no difference 
in their make at all, what distinguishes the sexes excepted, and 
the female is rather the fiercest of the two. A bull is a terrible 
creature when he is kept up, but where he has twenty or more 
cows to range among, in a little time he will become as tame as 
any of them, and a dozen hens will spoil the best game cock hi 
England. Harts and deers are counted chaste and timorous crea- 
tures, and so indeed they are almost all the year long, except in 
rutting time, and then on a sudden they become bold to admiration 
and often make at the keepers themselves. 

That the influence of those two principal appetites, hunger and 
lust, upon the temper of animals is not so whimsical as some may 
imagine may be partly demonstrated from what is observable in 
ourselves; for, though our hunger is infinitely less violent than 
that of wolves and other ravenous creatures, yet we see that peo- 
ple who are in health and have a tolerable stomach are more fretful 
and sooner put out of humour for trifles when they stay for their 
victuals beyond their usual hours than at any other time. And 
again, though lust in man is not so raging as it is in bulls, and 
other salacious creatures, yet nothing provokes men and women 
both sooner and more violently to anger than what crosses their 
amours when they are heartily in love; and the most fearful and 
tenderly educated of either sex have slighted the greatest dangers 
and set aside all other considerations to compass the destruction 
of a rival. 

Hitherto I have endeavoured to demonstrate, that no creature 
can fight offensively as long as his fear lasts; that fear cannot be 
conquered but by another passion; that the most contrary to it 
and most effectual to overcome it is anger; that the two principal 
appetites which, disappointed, can stir up this last-named passion 
are hunger and lust; and that in all brute beasts the proneness 
to anger and obstinacy in fighting generally depend upon the 
violence of either or both those 'appetites together. From whence 
it must follow that what we call prowess or natural courage in 
creatures is nothing but the effect of anger, and that all fierce 



FABLE OF THE BEES 131 

animals must be either very ravenous or very lustful, if not both. 

Let us now examine what by this rule we ought to judge of our 
own species. From the tenderness of man's skin and the great care 
that is required for years together to rear him; from the make of 
his jaws, the evenness of his teeth, the breadth of his nails, and 
the slightness of both, it is not probable that nature should have 
designed him for rapine; for this reason his hunger is not voracious 
as it is in beasts of prey; neither is he so salacious as other animals 
that are called so, and being besides very industrious to supply 
his wants, he can have no reigning appetite to perpetuate his anger 
and must consequently be a timorous animal. 

What I have said last must only be understood of man in his 
savage state; for, if we examine him as a member of a society 
and a taught animal, we shall find him quite another creature. 
As soon as his pride has room to play, and envy, avarice, and 
ambition begin to catch hold of him, he is roused from his natural 
innocence and stupidity. As his knowledge increases, his desires 
are enlarged, and consequently his wants and appetites are multi- 
plied. Hence it must follow that he will often be crossed in the 
pursuit of them and meet with abundance more disappointment 
to stir up his anger in this than his former condition, and man 
would in a little time become the most hurtful and obnoxious 
creature in the world, if let alone, whenever he could overpower 
his adversary, if he had no mischief to fear but from the person 
that angered him. 

The first care, therefore, of all governments is by severe pun- 
ishments to curb his anger when it does hurt and so, by increasing 
his fears, prevent the mischief it might produce. When various 
laws to restrain him from using force are strictly executed, self- 
preservation must teach him to be peaceable; and, as it is every- 
body's business to be as little disturbed as is possible, his fears 
will be continually augmented and enlarged as he advances in 
experience, understanding, and foresight. The consequence of this 
must be that as the provocations he will receive to anger will be 
infinite in the civilized state, so his fears to damp it will be the 
same, and thus in a little time he will be taught by his fears to 
destroy his anger and by art to consult, in an opposite method, the 
same self-preservation for which nature before had furnished him 
with anger, as well as the rest of his passions. 



132 FABLE OF THE BEES 

The only useful passion, then, that man is possessed of toward 
the peace and quiet of a society is his fear, and the more you 
work upon it, the more orderly and governable he will be; for how 
useful soever anger may be to man, as he is a single creature by 
himself, yet the society has no manner of occasion for it. But 
nature being always the same in the formation of animals pro- 
duces all creatures as like to those that beget and bear them as the 
place she forms them in, and the various influences from without, 
will give her leave; and consequently all men, whether they are 
born in courts or forests, are susceptible of anger. When this 
passion overcomes (as among all degrees of people it sometimes 
does) the whole set of fears man has, he has true courage and 
will fight as boldly as a lion or a tiger, and at no other time; and 
I shall endeavour to prove that whatever is called courage in man, 
when he is not angry, is spurious and artificial. 

It is possible by good government to keep a society always 
quiet in itself, but nobody can ensure peace from without forever. 
The society may have occasion to extend their limits further and 
enlarge their territories, or others may invade theirs, or something 
else will happen that man must be brought to fight; for how 
civilized soever men may be, they never forget that force goes 
beyond reason. The politician now must alter his measures and 
take off some of man's fears; he must strive to persuade him that 
all what was told him before of the barbarity of killing men ceases 
as soon as these men are enemies to the public, and that their 
adversaries are neither so good nor so strong as themselves. These 
things well managed will seldom fail of drawing the hardiest, the 
most quarrelsome, and the most mischievous into combat; but 
unless they are better qualified, I will not answer for their be- 
haviour there. If once you can make them undervalue their 
enemies, you may soon stir them up to anger, and while that lasts 
they will fight with greater obstinacy than any disciplined troops. 
But if any thing happens that was unforeseen, and a sudden great 
noise, a tempest, or any strange or uncommon accident that seems 
to threaten them intervenes, fear seizes them, disarms their anger, 
and makes them run away to a man. 

This natural courage, therefore, as soon as people begin to 
have more wit, must be soon exploded. In the first place, those 
that have felt the smart of the enemy's blows will not always 



FABLE OF THE BEES 133 

believe what is said to undervalue him and are often not easily 
provoked to anger. Secondly, anger consisting in an ebullition of 
the spirits is a passion of no long continuance (ira juror brevis 
est), and the enemies, if they withstand the first shock of these 
angry people, have commonly the better of it. Thirdly, as long 
as people are angry, all counsel and discipline are lost upon them, 
and they can never be brought to use art or conduct in their battles. 
Anger then, without which no creature has natural courage, being 
altogether useless in a war to be managed by stratagem and 
brought into a regular art, the government must find out an equiv- 
alent for courage that will make men fight. 

Whoever would civilize men and establish them into a body 
politic must- be thoroughly acquainted with all the passions and 
appetites, strength and weaknesses of their frame and understand 
how to turn their greatest frailties to the advantage of the public. 
In the Inquiry into the Origin of Moral Virtue, I have shown how 
easily men were induced to believe anything that is said in their 
praise. If, therefore, a lawgiver or politician whom they have a 
great veneration for should tell them that the generality of men 
had within them a principle of valour distinct from anger, or any 
other passion that made them to despise danger and face death 
itself with intrepidity, and that they who had the most of it were 
the most valuable of their kind, it is very likely, considering what 
has been said, that most of them, though they felt nothing of this 
principle, would swallow it for truth, and that the proudest, feeling 
themselves moved at this piece of flattery and not well versed in 
distinguishing the passions, might imagine that they felt it heaving 
in their breasts, by mistaking pride for courage. If but one in 
ten can be persuaded openly to declare that he is possessed of 
this principle and maintain it against all gainsayers, there will soon 
be a half a dozen that shall assert the same. Whoever has once 
owned it is engaged, the politician has nothing to do but to take 
all imaginable care to flatter the pride of those that brag of and 
are willing to stand by it a thousand different ways. The same pride 
that drew him in first will ever after oblige him to defend the 
assertion, till at last the fear of discovering the reality of his heart 
comes to be so great that it outdoes the fear of death itself. Do 
but increase man's pride and his fear of shame will ever be pro- 
portioned to it; for the greater value a man sets upon himself, the 



134 FABLE OF THE BEES 

more pains he will take and the greater hardships he will undergo 
to avoid shame. 

The great art to make man courageous is first to make him own 
this principle of valour within and afterwards to inspire him with 
as much horror against shame as nature has given him against 
death; and that there are things to which man has, or may have, 
a stronger aversion than he has to death is evident from suicide. 
He that makes death his choice must look upon it as less terrible 
than what he shuns by it; for whether the evil dreaded be present 
or to come, real or imaginary, nobody would kill himself wilfully 
but to avoid something. Lucretia held out bravely against all the 
attacks of the ravisher, even when he threatened her life, which 
shows that she valued her virtue beyond it; but when he threatened 
her reputation with eternal infamy, she fairly surrendered and then 
slew herself, a certain sign that she valued her virtue less than 
her glory and her life less than either. The fear of death did not 
make her yield, for she resolved to die before she did it, and her 
compliance must only be considered as a bribe to make Tarquin 
forbear sullying her reputation; so that life had neither the first 
nor second place in the esteem of Lucretia. The courage, then, 
which is only useful to the body politic, and what is generally 
called true valour, is artificial and consists in a superlative horror 
against shame, by flattery infused into men of exalted pride. 

As soon as the notions of honour and shame are received among 
a society, it is not difficult to make men fight. First, take care they 
are persuaded of the justice of then* cause; for no man fights 
heartily that thinks himself in the wrong; then show them that 
their altars, their possessions, wives, children, and everything that 
is near and dear to them is concerned in the present quarrel, or at 
least may be influenced by it hereafter; then put feathers hi then- 
caps, and distinguish them from others, talk of public-spiritedness, 
the love of their country, facing an enemy with intrepidity, despis- 
ing death, the bed of honour, and such like high-sounding words, 
and every proud man will take up arms and fight himself to death 
before he will turn tail, if it be by daylight. One man in an army 
is a check upon another, and a hundred of them, that single and 
without witness would be all cowards, are, for fear of incurring 
one another's contempt, made valiant by being together. To con- 
tinue and heighten this artificial courage, all that run away ought 



FABLE OF THE BEES 135 

to be punished with ignominy; those that fought well, whether 
they did beat or were beaten, must be flattered and solemnly com- 
mended; those that lost their limbs rewarded; and those that were 
killed ought, above all, to be taken notice of, artfully lamented, 
and to have extraordinary encomiums bestowed upon them; for 
to pay honours to the dead will ever be a sure method to make 
bubbles* of the living. 

When I say that the courage made use of hi the wars is arti- 
ficial, I do not imagine that by the same art all men may be made 
equally valiant; as men have not an equal share of pride and 
differ from one another in shape and inward structure, it is im- 
possible they should be all equally fit for the same uses. Some men 
will never be. able to learn music, and yet make good mathema- 
ticians; others will play excellently well upon the violin, and yet 
be coxcombs as long as they live, let them converse with whom 
they please. But to show that there is no evasion, I shall prove 
that, setting aside what I said of artificial courage already, what 
the greatest hero differs in from the rankest coward is altogether 
corporeal and depends upon the inward make of man. What I 
mean is called constitution, by which is understood the orderly 
or disorderly mixture of the fluids in our body; that constitution 
which favours courage consists in the natural strength, elasticity, 
and due contexture of the finer spirits, and upon them wholly 
depends what we call stedfastness, resolution, and obstinacy. It is 
the only ingredient that is common to natural and artificial bravery 
and is to either what size is to white walls, which hinders them 
from coming off, and makes them lasting. That some people are 
very much, others very little frightened at things that are strange 
and sudden to them, is likewise altogether owing to the firmness 
or imbecility in the tone of the spirits. Pride is of no use hi a 
fright because while it lasts we cannot think, which, being counted 
a disgrace, is the reason people are always angry with anything 
that frightens them as soon as the surprise is over; and when at 
the turn of a battle the conquerors give no quarter and are very 
cruel, it is a sign their enemies fought well and had put them first 
into great fears. 

That resolution depends upon this tone of the spirits appears 



*bubbles dupes. 



136 FABLE OF THE BEES 

likewise from the effects of strong liquors, the fiery particles 
whereof crowding into the brain, strengthen the spirits; their opera- 
tion imitates that of anger, which I said before was an ebullition 
of the spirits. It is for this reason that most people when they are 
in drink are sooner touched and more prone to anger than at other 
times, and some raving mad without any provocation at all. It 
is likewise observed that brandy makes men more quarrelsome at 
the same pitch of drunkenness than wine, because the spirits of 
distilled waters have abundance of fiery particles mixed with them, 
which the other has not. The contexture of spirits is so weak in 
some, that though they have pride enough, no art can ever make 
them fight or overcome their fears; but this is a defect in the prin- 
ciple of the fluids, as other deformities are faults of the solids. 
These pusillanimous people are never thoroughly provoked to 
anger, where there is any danger, and drinking makes them bolder, 
but seldom so resolute as to attack any, unless they be women or 
children or such who they know dare not resist. This constitution 
is often influenced by health and sickness and impaired by great 
losses of blood; sometimes it is corrected by diet; and it is this 
which the Duke de la Rochefoucault means, when he says: vanity, 
shame, and above all constitution, make up very often the courage 
of men and virtue of women. 

There is nothing that more improves the useful martial courage 
I treat of, and at the same time shows it to be artificial, than prac- 
tice; for when men are disciplined, come to be acquainted with 
all the tools of death and engines of destruction, when the shouts, 
the outcries, the fire and smoke, the groans of wounded and 
ghostly looks of dying men, with all the various scenes of mangled 
carcases and bloody limbs tore off, begin to be familiar to them, 
their fears abate apace; not that they are now less afraid to die 
than before, but being used so often to see the same dangers, they 
apprehend the reality of them less than they did. As they are 
deservedly valued for every siege they are at and every battle 
they are in, it is impossible but the several actions they share in 
must continually become as many solid steps by which their pride 
mounts up; and thus their fear of shame, as I said before, will 
always be proportioned to their pride, increasing as the appre- 
hension of the danger decreases. It is no wonder that most of them 
learn to discover little or no fear, and some great generals are able 



FABLE OF THE BEES 137 

to preserve a presence of mind and counterfeit a calm serenity 
within the midst of all the noise, horror, and confusion that attend 
a battle. 

So silly a creature is man as that, intoxicated with the fumes 
of vanity, he can feast on the thoughts of the praises that shall 
be paid his memory in future ages with so much ecstacy as to 
neglect his present life, nay, court and covet death, if he but 
imagines that it will add to the glory he had acquired before. There 
is no pitch of self-denial that a man of pride and constitution 
cannot reach, nor any passion so violent but he will sacrifice it 
to another which is superior to it; and here I cannot but admire 
at the simplicity of some good men, who, when they hear of the 
joy and alacrity with which holy men in persecutions have suffered 
for their faith, imagine that such constancy must exceed all human 
force unless it was supported by some miraculous assistance from 
Heaven. As most people are willing to acknowledge all the frailties 
of their species, so they are unacquainted with the strength of our 
nature and know not that some men of firm constitution may work 
themselves up into enthusiasm by no other help than the violence 
of their passions; yet it is certain that there have been men who 
only assisted with pride and constitution to maintain the worst of 
causes, have undergone death and torments with as much cheer- 
fulness as the best of men, animated with piety and devotion, ever 
did for the true religion. 

To prove this assertion, I could produce many instances; but 
one or two will be sufficient. Jordanus Bruno of Nola, who wrote 
that silly piece of blasphemy called Spaccio detta Bestia tri- 
umphante, and the infamous Vanini* were both executed for 
openly professing and teaching of atheism: the latter might have 
been pardoned the moment before the execution if he would have 
retracted his doctrine; but rather than recant, he chose to be burnt 
to ashes. As he went to the stake, he was so far from showing any 
concern that he held his hand out to a physician whom he hap- 
pened to know, desiring him to judge of the calmness of his mind 
by the regularity of his pulse, and from thence taking an oppor- 
tunity of making an impious comparison, uttered a sentence too 



*Giordano Bruno (1548-1600); the title of the work is Spaccio de 
la Bestia Trionfante; Giulio Cesare Lucilio Vanini (1585-1619). 



138 FABLE OF THE BEES 

execrable to be mentioned. To these we may join one Mahomet 
Effendi, who, as Sir Paul Ricaut tells us, was put to death at 
Constantinople for having advanced some notions against the 
existence of a God. He likewise might have saved his life by con- 
fessing his error and renouncing it for the future, but chose rather 
to persist in his blasphemies, saying, "Though he had no reward 
to expect, the love of truth constrained him to suffer martyrdom 
in its defence." 

I have made this digression chiefly to show the strength of 
human nature and what mere man may perform by pride and con- 
stitution alone. Man may certainly be as violently roused by his 
vanity as a lion is by his anger; and not only this, avarice, revenge, 
ambition, and almost every passion, pity not excepted, when they 
are extraordinary, may, by overcoming fear, serve him instead 
of valour and be mistaken for it even by himself, as daily experi- 
ence must teach everybody that will examine and look into the 
motives from which some men act. But that we may more clearly 
perceive what this pretended principle is really built upon, let us 
look into the management of military affairs, and we shall find that 
pride is nowhere so openly encouraged as there. As for clothes, the 
very lowest of the commission officers have them richer, or at 
least more gay and splendid, than are generally wore by other 
people of four or five times their income. Most of them, and 
especially those that have families and can hardly subsist, would 
be very glad all Europe over to be less expensive that way; but 
it is a force put upon them to uphold their pride, which they do 
not think on. 

But the ways and means to rouse man's pride and catch him 
by it are nowhere more grossly conspicuous than in the treatment 
which the common soldiers receive, whose vanity is to be worked 
upon (because there must be so many) at the cheapest rate 
imaginable. Things we are accustomed to we do not mind, or else 
what mortal that never had seen a soldier could look without laughing 
upon a man accoutred with so much paltry gaudiness and affected 
finery? The coarsest manufacture that can be made of wool, dyed 
of a brickdust colour, goes down with him because it is in imita- 
tion of scarlet or crimson cloth; and to make him think himself 
as like his officer as it is possible, with little or no cost, instead of 
silver or gold lace, his hat trimmed with white or yellow worsted, 



FABLE OF THE BEES 139 

which in others would deserve bedlam; yet these fine allurements 
and the noise made upon a calf s skin have drawn in and been 
the destruction of more men in reality than all the killing eyes and 
bewitching voices of women ever slew in jest. To-day the swine- 
herd puts on his red coat and believes everybody hi earnest that 
calls him gentleman; and two days after Serjeant Kite gives him 
a swinging wrap with his cane for holding his musket an inch 
higher than he should do. As to the real dignity of the employ- 
ment, in the two last wars officers, when recruits were wanted, 
were allowed to list fellows that were convicted of burglary and 
other capital crimes, which shows that to be made a soldier is 
deemed to be a preferment next to hanging. A trooper is yet worse 
than a foot soldier, for when he is most at ease, he has the mor- 
tification of being groom to a horse that spends more money than 
himself. When a man reflects on all this, the usage they generally 
receive from their officers, their pay, and the care that is taken 
of them when they are not wanted, must he not wonder how 
wretches can be so silly as to be proud of being called gentlemen 
soldiers? Yet if there were not, no art, discipline, or money would 
be capable of making them so brave as thousands of them are. 

If we will mind what effects man's bravery, without any other 
qualifications to sweeten him, would have out of an army, we shall 
find that it would be very pernicious to the civil society; for if 
man could conquer all his fears, you would hear of nothing but 
rapes, murders, and violences of all sorts, and valiant men would 
be like giants in romances; politics, therefore, discovered in men 
a mixed-metal principle, which was a compound of justice, hon- 
esty, and all the moral virtues joined to courage, and all that were 
possessed of it turned to knights-errant, of course. They did abun- 
dance of good throughout the world by taming monsters, delivering 
the distressed, and killing the oppressors; but the wings of all the 
dragons being clipped, the giants destroyed, and the damsels 
everywhere set at liberty, except some few in Spain and Italy who 
remained still captivated by their monsters, the order of chivalry, 
to whom the standard of ancient honour belonged, has been laid 
aside some time. It was like their armours, very massy and heavy; 
the many virtues about it made it very troublesome, and as ages 
grew wiser and wiser, the principle of honour in the beginning 
of the last century was melted over again and brought to a new 



140 FABLE OF THE BEES 

standard; they put in the same weight of courage, half the quantity 
of honesty, and a very little justice, but not a scrap of any other 
virtue, which has made it very easy and portable to what it was. 
However, such as it is, there would be no living without it in a 
large nation; it is the tie of society, and though we are beholden to 
our frailties for the chief ingredient of it, there is no virtue, at least 
that I am acquainted with, that has been half so instrumental to 
the civilizing of mankind, who in great societies would soon de- 
generate into cruel villains and treacherous slaves, were honour 
to be removed from among them. 

As to the duelling part which belongs to it, I pity the unfortu- 
nate whose lot it is; but to say that those who are guilty of it go 
by false rules or mistake the notions of honour is ridiculous; for 
either there is no honour at all, or it teaches men to resent injuries 
and accept of challenges. You may as well deny that it is the 
fashion what you see everybody wear as to say that demanding 
and giving satisfaction is against the laws of true honour. Those 
that rail at duelling do not consider the benefit the society receives 
from that fashion; if every ill-bred fellow might use what lan- 
guage he pleased without being called to an account for it, all 
conversation would be spoiled. Some grave people tell us that 
the Greeks and Romans were such valiant men, and yet knew 
nothing of duelling but in their country's quarrel. This is very 
true, but for that reason the kings and princes in Homer gave one 
another worse language than our porters and hackney coachmen 
would be able to bear without resentment. 

Would you hinder duelling, pardon nobody that offends that 
way, and make the laws as severe as you can, but do not take 
away the thing itself, the custom of it. This will not only prevent 
the frequency of it, but likewise, by rendering the most resolute 
and most powerful cautious and circumspect in their behaviour, 
polish and brighten society in general. Nothing civilizes a man 
equally as his fear, and if not all (as my lord Rochester said), 
at least most men would be cowards if they durst. The dread of 
being called to an account keeps abundance in awe; and there are 
thousands of mannerly and well-accomplished gentlemen in 
Europe who would have been insolent and insupportable cox- 
combs without it; besides, if it was out of fashion to ask satisfac- 
tion for injuries which the law cannot take hold of, there would 



FABLE OF THE BEES 141 

be twenty times the mischief done there is now, or else you must 
have twenty times the constables and other officers to keep the 
peace. I confess that though it happens but seldom, it is a calamity 
to the people and generally the families it falls upon; but there 
can be no perfect happiness in this world, and all felicity has an 
allay [alloy]. The act itself is uncharitable, but when above thirty in 
a nation destroy themselves in one year and not half that number 
are killed by others, I do not think the people can be said to love 
their neighbours worse than themselves. It is strange that a nation 
should grudge to see perhaps half-a-dozen men sacrificed in a 
twelvemonth to obtain so valuable a blessing as the politeness of 
manners, the pleasure of conversation, and the happiness of com- 
pany in general that is often so willing to expose and sometimes 
loses as many thousands in a few hours without knowing whether 
it will do any good or not. 

I would have nobody that reflects on the mean original of honour 
complain of being gulled and made a property by cunning poli- 
ticians, but desire everybody to be satisfied that the governors of 
societies, and those in high stations, are greater bubbles to pride 
than any of the rest. If some great men had not a superlative pride 
and everybody understood the enjoyment of life, who would be 
a lord chancellor of England, a prime minister of state in France, 
or what gives more fatigue and not a sixth part of the profit of 
either, a grand pensionary of Holland? The reciprocal services 
which all men pay to one another are the foundation of the society. 
The great ones are not flattered with their high birth for nothing; 
it is to rouse their pride and excite them to glorious actions that 
we extol their race, whether it deserves it or not; and some men 
have been complimented with the greatness of their family and 
the merit of their ancestors when in the whole generation you 
could not find two but what were uxorious fools, silly bigots, noted 
poltroons, or debauched whore-masters. The established pride that 
is inseparable from tfcose that are possessed of titles already makes 
them often strive as much not to seem unworthy of them, as the 
working ambition of others that are yet without, renders them 
industrious and indefatigable to deserve them. When a gentleman 
is made a baron or an earl, it is as great a check upon him in 
many respects as a gown and cassock are to a young student that 
has been newly taken into orders. 



142 FABLE OF THE BEES 

The only thing of weight that can be said against modem honour 
is that it is directly opposite to religion. The one bids you bear 
injuries with patience; the other tells you if you do not resent them, 
you are not fit to live. Religion commands you to leave all revenge 
to God; honour bids you trust your revenge to nobody but your- 
self, even where the law would do it for you; religion plainly for- 
bids murder; honour openly justifies it; religion bids you not shed 
blood upon any account whatever; honour bids you fight for the 
least trifle; religion is built on humility, and honour upon pride; 
how to reconcile them must be left to wiser heads than mine. 

The reason why there are so few men of real virtue and so many 
of real honour is because all the recompense a man has of a vir- 
tuous action is the pleasure of doing it, which most people reckon 
but poor pay; but the self-denial a man of honour submits to in 
one appetite is immediately rewarded by the satisfaction he re- 
ceives from another, and what he abates of his avarice or any 
other passion is doubly repaid to his pride; besides, honour gives 
large grains of allowance and virtue none. A man of honour must 
not cheat or tell a lie; he must punctually repay what he borrows 
at play, though the creditor has nothing to show for it; but he 
may drink, and swear, and owe money to all the tradesmen in 
town without taking notice of their dunning. A man of honour 
must be true to his prince and country while he is in their service; 
but if he thinks himself not well used, he may quit it and do them 
all the mischief he can. A man of honour must never change his 
religion for interest; but he may be as debauched as he pleases 
and never practice any. He must make no attempts upon his 
friend's wife, daughter, sister, or anybody that is trusted to his 

care; but he may lie with all the world besides. 

* * * * 

Line 367 To live great, 

Had made her husband rob the state. 



What our common rogues, when they are going to be hanged, 
chiefly complain of as the cause of their untimely end is, next 
to the neglect of the Sabbath, their having kept company with ill 
women, meaning whores; and I do not question but that among 
the lesser villains many venture their necks to indulge and satisfy 
their low amours. But the words that have given occasion to this 



FABLE OF THE BEES 143 

remark may serve to hint to us that among the great ones men are 
often put upon such dangerous projects and forced into such 
pernicious measures by their wives as the most subtle mistress 
never could have persuaded them to. I have shown already that 
the worst of women and most profligate of the sex, did contribute 
to the consumption of superfluities, as well as the necessaries of 
life, and consequently were beneficial to many peaceable drudges 
that work hard to maintain their families and have no worse 
design than an honest livelihood. Let them be banished, notwith- 
standing, says a good man. When every strumpet is gone and the 
land wholly freed from lewdness, God Almighty will pour such 
blessings upon it as will vastly exceed the profits that are now 
got by harlots. This perhaps would be true; but I can make it 
evident that, with or without prostitutes, nothing could make 
amends for the detriment trade would sustain if all those of that 
sex who enjoy the happy state of matrimony should act and behave 
themselves as a sober wise man could wish them. 

The variety of work that is performed and the number of hands 
employed to gratify the fickleness and luxury of women is pro- 
digious, and if only the married ones should hearken to reason 
and just remonstrances, think themselves sufficiently answered 
with the first refusal, and never ask a second time what had been 
once denied them: if, I say, married women would do this and 
then lay out no money but what their husbands knew and freely 
allowed of, the consumption of a thousand things they now make 
use of would be lessened by at least a fourth part. Let us go from 
house to house and observe the way of the world only among the 
middling people, creditable shopkeepers, that spend two or three 
hundred a year, and we shall find the women when they have hah* 
a score suits of clothes, two or three of them not the worse for 
wearing, will think it a sufficient plea for new ones, if they can 
say that they have never a gown or petticoat but what they have 
been often seen in and are known by, especially at church; I do 
not speak now of profuse and extravagant women, but such as 
are counted prudent and moderate in their desires. 

If by this pattern we should in proportion judge of the highest 
ranks, where the richest clothes are but a trifle to their other 
expences, and not forget the furniture of all sorts, equipages, 
jewels, and buildings of persons of quality, we should find the 



144 FABLE OF THE BEES 

fourth part I speak of a vast article in trade, and that the loss of 
it would be a greater calamity to such a nation as ours than it 
is possible to conceive any other, a raging pestilence not excepted; 
for the death of half a million of people could not cause a tenth 
part of the disturbance to the kingdom than the same number of 
poor unemployed would certainly create if at once they were to 
be added to those that already, one way or other, are a burden to 
the society. 

Some few men have a real passion for their wives and are fond 
of them without reserve; others that do not care and have little 
occasion for women are yet seemingly uxurious and love out of 
vanity; they take delight in a handsome wife as a coxcomb does 
in a fine horse, not for the use he makes of it, but because it is 
his. The pleasure lies in the consciousness of an uncontrollable 
possession, and what follows from it, the reflection on the mighty 
thoughts he imagines others to have of his happiness. The men 
of either sort may be very lavish to their wives, and often pre- 
venting* their wishes, crowd new clothes and other finery upon 
them faster than they can ask it, but the greatest part are wiser 
than to indulge the extravagances of their wives so far as to give 
them immediately everything they are pleased to fancy. It is in- 
credible what vast quantity of trinkets as well as apparel are pur- 
chased and used by women, which they could never have come at 
by any other means than pinching their families, marketing, and 
other ways of cheating and pilfering from their husbands. Others, 
by ever teasing their spouses, tire them into compliance and con- 
quer even obstinate churls by perseverance and their assiduity of 
asking. A third sort are outrageous at a denial, and by downright 
noise and scolding bully their tame fools out of anything they 
have a mind to; while thousands, by the force of wheedling, know 
how to overcome the best weighed reasons and the most positive 
reiterated refusals; the young and beautiful especially laugh at 
all remonstrances and denials, and few of them scruple to employ 
the most tender minutes of wedlock to promote a sordid interest. 
Here, had I time, I could inveigh with warmth against those base, 
wicked women, who calmly play their arts and false deluding 



* preventing anticipating. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 145 

charms against our strength and prudence and act the harlots with 
husbands! Nay, she is worse than whore, who impiously profanes 
and prostitutes the sacred rites of love to vile ignoble ends; that 
first excites to passion and invites to joy with seeming ardour, 
then racks our fondness for no other purpose than to extort a 
gift, while full of guile in counterfeited transports, she watches for 
the moment when men can least deny. 

I beg pardon for this start out of my way and desire the experi- 
enced reader duly to weigh what has been said as to the main 
purpose, and after that call to mind the temporal blessing which 
men daily hear not only toasted and wished for when people are 
merry and doing of nothing; but likewise gravely and solemnly 
prayed for in- churches and other religious assemblies by clergymen 
of all sorts and sizes. And as soon as he shall have laid these 
things together and, from what he has observed in the common 
affairs of life, reasoned upon them consequentially without preju- 
dice, I dare flatter myself that he will be obliged to own that a 
considerable portion of what the prosperity of London and trade 
in general, and consequently the honour, strength, safety, and all 
the worldly interest of the nation consist in, depend entirely on the 
deceit and vile strategems of women; and that humility, content, 
meekness, obedience to reasonable husbands, frugality, and all the 
virtues together, if they were possessed of them in the most eminent 
degree, could not possibly be a thousandth part so serviceable to 
make an opulent, powerful, and what we call a flourishing kingdom 
than their most hateful qualities. 

I do not question but many of my readers will be startled at 
this assertion when they look on the consequences that may be 
drawn from it; and I shall be asked whether people may not as 
well be virtuous in a populous, rich, wide, extended kingdom, as 
in a small, indigent state or principality that is poorly inhabited? 
And if that be impossible, whether it is not the duty of all sov- 
ereigns to reduce their subjects as to wealth and numbers as much 
as they can? If I allow they may, I own myself hi the wrong; and 
if I affirm the other, my tenets will justly be called impious or at 
least dangerous to all large societies. As it is not in this place of 
the book only, but a great many others that such queries might 
be made even by a well-meaning reader, I shall here explain myself 



146 FABLE OF THE BEES 

and endeavour to solve those difficulties which several passages 
might have raised in him, in order to demonstrate the consistency 
of my opinion to reason and the strictest morality. 

I lay down as a first principle that in all societies, great or 
small, it is the duty of every member of it to be good, that virtue 
ought to be encouraged, vice discountenanced, the laws obeyed, 
and the transgressors punished. After this I affirm that if we consult 
history, both ancient and modern, and take a view of what has 
passed in the world, we shall find that human nature since the 
fall of Adam has always been the same and that the strength and 
frailties of it have ever been conspicuous in one part of the globe 
or other without any regard to ages, climates, or religion. I never 
said nor imagined that man could not be virtuous as well in a 
rich and mighty kingdom as in the most pitiful commonwealth; 
but I own it is my sense that no society can be raised into such 
a rich and mighty kingdom, or so raised, subsist hi their wealth 
and power for any considerable time without the vices of man. 

This, I imagine, is sufficiently proved throughout the book; 
and as human nature still continues the same as it has always been 
for so many thousand years, we have no great reason to suspect 
a future change in it while the world endures. Now, I cannot see 
what immorality there is in showing a man the origin and power 
of those passions which so often, even unknowingly to himself, 
hurry him away from his reason; or that there is any impiety in 
putting him upon his guard against himself and the secret strata- 
gems of self-love, and teaching him the difference between such 
actions as proceed from a victory over the passions and those 
that are only the result of a conquest which one passion obtains 
over another; that is, between real and counterfeited virtue. It is 
an admirable saying of a worthy divine, that though many dis- 
coveries have been made in the world of self-love, there is yet 
abundance of terra incognita left behind. What hurt do I do to 
man if I make him more known to himself than he was before? 
But we are all so desparately in love with flattery that we can 
never relish a truth that is mortifying, and I do not believe that 
the immortality of the soul, a truth broached long before Chris- 
tianity, would have ever found such a general reception hi human 
capacities as it has, had it not been a pleasing one that extolled 



FABLE OF THE BEES 147 

and was a compliment to the whole species, the meanest and most 
miserable not excepted. 

Everyone loves to hear the thing well spoke of that he has a 
share in, even bailiffs, gaol-keepers, and the hangman himself 
would have you think well of their functions; nay, thieves and 
housebreakers have a greater regard to those of their fraternity 
than they have for honest people; and I sincerely believe that it 
is chiefly self-love that has gained this little treatise (as it was 
before the last impression) so many enemies; everyone looks upon 
it as an affront done to himself because it detracts from the dig- 
nity and lessens the fine notions he had conceived of mankind, 
the most worshipful company he belongs to. When I say that 
societies cannot be raised to wealth and power and the top of 
earthly glory, without vices, I do not think that by so saying I 
bid men to be vicious any more than I bid them be quarrelsome 
or covetous when I affirm that the profession of the law could 
not be maintained in such numbers and splendor if there was not 
abundance of too selfish and litigious people. 

But as nothing would more clearly demonstrate the falsity of 
my notions than that the generality of the people should fall in 
with them, so I do not expect the approbation of the multitude. 
I write not to many nor seek for any well-wishers, but among the 
few that can think abstractly and have their minds elevated above 
the vulgar. If I have shown the way to worldly greatness, I have 
always without hesitation preferred the road that leads to virtue. 

Would you banish fraud and luxury, prevent profaneness and 
irreligion, and make the generality of the people charitable, good, 
and virtuous; break down the printing presses, melt the founds,* 
and burn all the books in the island, except those at the univer- 
sities, where they remain unmolested, and suffer no volume in 
private hands but a Bible; knock down foreign trade, prohibit 
all commerce with strangers, and permit no ships to go to sea 
that ever will return, beyond fisher-boats. Restore to the clergy, 
the king, and the barons their ancient privileges, prerogatives, and 
possessions; build new churches and convert all the coin you can 
come at into sacred utensils; erect monasteries and alms-houses 



* founds fonts of type. 



148 FABLE OF THE BEES 

in abundance, and let no parish be without a charity-school. Enact 
sumptuary laws, and let your youth be inured to hardship; inspire 
them with all the nice and most refined notions of honour and 
shame, of friendship and heroism, and introduce among them a 
great variety of imaginary rewards; then let the clergy preach 
abstinence and self-denial to others and take what liberty they 
please for themselves; let them bear sway in the management of 
state affairs and no man be made lord-treasurer but a bishop. 

But by such pious endeavours and wholesome regulations, the 
scene would be soon altered; the greatest part of the covetous, the 
discontented, the restless and ambitious villains would leave the 
land; vast swarms of cheating knaves would abandon the city and 
be dispersed throughout the country: artificers would learn to 
hold the plough, merchants turn farmers, and the sinful overgrown 
Jerusalem, without famine, war, pestilence, or compulsion, be 
emptied in the most easy manner and ever after cease to be dread- 
ful to her sovereigns. This happy reformed kingdom would by 
this means be crowded in no part of it, and everything necessary 
for the sustenance of man be cheap and abound; on the contrary, 
the root of so many thousand evils, money, would be very scarce 
and as little wanted, where every man should enjoy the fruits of 
his own labour, and our own dear manufacture unmixed, be 
promiscuously wore by the lord and the peasant. It is impossible 
that such a change of circumstances should not influence the man- 
ners of a nation and render them temperate, honest, and sincere; 
and from the next generation we might expect a more healthy and 
robust offspring than the present; an harmless, innocent, and well- 
meaning people that would never dispute the doctrine of passive 
obedience* nor any other orthodox principles, but be submissive 
to superiors and unanimous in religious worship. 

Here I fancy myself interrupted by an Epicure, who, not to 
want a restorative diet in case of necessity, is never without live 
ortolans; and I am told that goodness and probity are to be had 
at a cheaper rate than the ruin of a nation and the destruction of 
all the comforts of life; that liberty and property may be main- 
tamed without wickedness or fraud, and men be good subjects 



'"The doctrine of the subject's duty of absolute unquestioning obedi- 
ence to the Sovereign. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 149 

without being slaves, and religious though they refused to be 
priest-rid; that to be frugal and saving is a duty incumbent only 
on those whose circumstances require it, but that a man of a 
good estate does his country a service by living up to the income 
of it; that as to himself, he is so much master of his appetites that 
he can abstain from anything upon occasion; that where true 
Hermitage was not to be had he could content himself with plain 
Bordeaux if it had a good body; that many a morning, instead 
of St. Lawrence, he has made a shift with Frontenac, and after 
dinner given Cyprus wine and even Madeira when he has had a 
large company and thought it extravagant to treat with Tockay; 
but that all voluntary mortifications are superstitious, only belong- 
ing to blind zealots and enthusiasts. He will quote my Lord Shaftes- 
bury against me and tell me that people may be virtuous and 
sociable without self-denial; that it is an affront to virtue to make 
it inaccessible, that I make a bugbear of it to frighten men from 
it as a thing impracticable; but that for his part he can praise God 
and at the same time enjoy his creatures with a good con- 
science. ... He will ask me at last whether the legislature, the 
wisdom of the nation itself, while they endeavour as much as 
possible to discourage profaneness and immorality and promote 
the glory of God, do not openly profess at the same time to have 
nothing more at heart than the ease and welfare of the subject, the 
wealth, strength, honour, and what else is called the true interest 
of the country? And, moreover, whether the most devout and 
most learned of our prelates, in their greatest concern for our 
conversion, when they beseech the Deity to turn their own as 
well as our hearts from the world and all carnal desires, do not in 
the same prayer as loudly solicit him to pour all earthly blessings 
and temporal felicity on the kingdom they belong to? 

These are the apologies, the excuses, and common pleas, not 
only of those who are notoriously vicious, but the generality of 
mankind, when you touch the copy-hold of their inclinations; and 
trying the real value they have for spirituals, should actually strip 
them of what their minds are wholly bent upon. Ashamed of the 
many frailties they feel within, all men endeavour to hide them- 
selves, their ugly nakedness, from each other, and wrapping up 
the true motives of their hearts hi the specious cloak of sociable- 
ness and their concern for the public good, they are in hopes of 



150 FABLE OF THE BEES 

concealing their filthy appetites and the deformity of their desires; 
while they are conscious within of the fondness for their darling 
lusts and their incapacity, bare-faced, to tread the arduous, rugged 

path of virtue. . . . 

* * * # 

Line 411. T' enjoy the world's conveniences. 

That the words decency and conveniency were very ambiguous 
and not to be understood unless we were acquainted with the 
quality and circumstances of the persons that made use of them 
has been hinted already.* The goldsmith, mercer, or any other of 
the most creditable shopkeepers that has three or four thousand 
pounds to set up with must have two dishes of meat every day 
and something extraordinary for Sundays. His wife must have a 
damask bed against her lying-in and two or three rooms very well 
furnished; the following summer she must have a house, or at least 
very good lodgings in the country. A man that has a being out of 
town must have a horse; his footman must have another. If he 
has a tolerable trade, he expects in eight or ten years time to keep 
his coach, which, notwithstanding, he hopes that after he has 
slaved (as he calls it) for two or three and twenty years, he shall 
be worth* at least a thousand a-year for his eldest son to inherit 
and two or three thousand pounds for each of his other children 
to begin the world with; and when men of such circumstances pray 
for their daily bread and mean nothing more extravagant by it, they 
are counted pretty modest people. Call this pride, luxury, super- 
fluity, or what you please, it is nothing but what ought to be in 
the capital of a flourishing nation; those of inferior condition must 
content themselves with less costly conveniences, as others of 
higher rank will be sure to make theirs more expensive. Some 
people call it but decency to be served in plate and reckon a 
coach and six among the necessary comforts of life; and if a peer 
has not above three or four thousand a-year, his lordship is counted 
poor. 

Since the first edition of this book, several have attacked me 
with demonstrations of the certain ruin which excessive luxury 



*In Remark on Line 277 [on Avarice], not included in this edition. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 151 

must bring upon all nations, who yet were soon answered when I 
showed them the limits within which I had confined it; and there- 
fore, that no reader for the future may misconstrue me on this 
head, I shall point at the cautions I have given and the provisos 
I have made in the former, as well as this present impression, and 
which, if not overlooked, must prevent all rational censure and 
obviate several objections that otherwise might be made against 
me. I have laid down as maxims never to be departed from that 
the poor should be kept strictly to work, and that it was prudence 
to relieve their wants, but folly to cure them; that agriculture and 
fishery should be promoted in all their branches in order to render 
provisions, and consequently labour, cheap. I have named igno- 
rance as a necessary ingredient in the mixture of society; from all 
which it is manifest that I could never have imagined that luxury 
was to be made general through every part of a kingdom. I have 
likewise required that property should be well secured, justice 
impartially administered, and in everything the interest of the 
nation taken care of; but what I have insisted on the most and 
repeated more than once is the great regard that is to be had 
to the balance of trade and the care the legislature ought to take 
that the yearly imports never exceed the exports; and where this 
is observed and the other things I spoke of are not neglected, 
I still continue to assert that no foreign luxury can undo a coun- 
try; the height of it is never seen but in nations that are vastly 
populous, and there only in the upper part of it, and the greater 
that is, the larger still in proportion must be the lowest, the basis 
that supports all, the multitude of working poor. 

Those who would too nearly imitate others of superior fortune 
must thank themselves if they are ruined. This is nothing against 
luxury; for whoever can subsist and lives above his income is a 
fool. Some persons of quality may keep three or four coaches and 
six and at the same time lay up money for their children; while 
a young shopkeeper is undone for keeping one sorry horse. It is 
impossible there should be a rich nation without prodigals, yet I 
never knew a city so full of spendthrifts but there were covetous 
people enough to answer their number. As an old merchant breaks 
for having been extravagant or careless a great while, so a young 
beginner falling into the same business gets an estate by being 
saving or more industrious before he is forty years old; besides 



152 FABLE OF THE BEES 

that, the frailties of men often work by contraries: some narrow 
souls can never thrive because they are too stingy, while longer 
heads amass great wealth by spending their money freely and 
seeming to despise it. But the vicissitudes of fortune are necessary, 
and the most lamentable are no more detrimental to society than 
the death of the individual members of it. Christenings are a 
proper balance to burials. Those who immediately lose by the mis- 
fortunes of others are very sorry, complain, and make a noise; 
but the others who get by them, as there always are such, hold 
their tongues because it is odious to be thought the better for 
the losses and calamities of our neighbour. The various ups and 
downs compose a wheel, that always turning round, gives motion 
to the whole machine. Philosophers that dare extend their thoughts 
beyond the narrow compass of what is immediately before them 
look on the alternate changes in the civil society no otherwise 
than they do on the risings and fallings of the lungs, the latter 
of which are much a part of respiration in the most perfect animals 
as the first, so that the fickle breath of never-stable fortune is to 
the body politic the same as floating air is to a living creature. 

Avarice then and prodigality are equally necessary to the society. 
That in some countries men are most generally lavish than in 
others proceeds from the difference in circumstances that dispose 
to either vice and arise from the condition of the social body, 
as well as the temperament of the natural. I beg pardon of the 
attentive reader if here, in behalf of short memories, I repeat some 
things, the substance of which they have already seen in Remark 
on line 307 [pp. 119 ff.]. More money than land, heavy taxes and 
scarcity of provisions, industry, laboriousness, and active and stir- 
ring spirit, ill-nature, and saturnine temper; old age, wisdom, 
trade, riches acquired by our own labour, and liberty and prop- 
erty well secured are all things that dispose to avarice. On the con- 
trary, indolence, content, good-nature, a jovial temper, youth, 
folly, arbitrary power, money easily got, plenty of provisions and 
the uncertainty of possessions are circumstances that render men 
prone to prodigality; where there is the most of the first, the pre- 
vailing vice will be avarice, and prodigality where the other turns 
the scale; but a national frugality there never was nor never will 
be without a national necessity. 

Sumptuary laws may be of use to an indigent country after 



FABLE OF THE BEES 153 

great calamities of war, pestilence, or famine, when work has stood 
still and the labour of the poor been interrupted; but to introduce 
them into an opulent kingdom is the wrong way to consult the 
interest of it. I shall end my remarks on the Grumbling Hive 
with assuring the champions of national frugality that it would 
be impossible for the Persians and other eastern people to pur- 
chase the vast quantities of fine English cloth they consume, should 
we load our women with less cargoes of Asiatic silks. 



[1723] 
A 

SEARCH 

INTO THE 

NATURE QF SOCIETY 



HE GENERALITY OF moralists and philosophers 
have hitherto agreed that there could be, no virtue without self- 
denial; but a late author, who is now much read by men of sense, 
is of a contrary opinion, and imagines that men, without any trou- 
ble or violence upon themselves, may be naturally virtuous. He 
seems to require and expect goodness in his species, as we do a 
sweet taste in grapes and China oranges, of which, if any of them 
are sour, we boldly pronounce that they are not come to that 
perfection their nature is capable of. This noble writer (for it 
is the Lord Shaftesbury I mean in his Characteristicks) fancies that 
as a man is made for society, so he ought to be born with a kind 
of affection to the whole, of which he is a part, and a propensity 
to seek the welfare of it. In pursuance of this supposition he calls 
every action performed with regard to the public good Virtuous, 
and all selfishness wholly excluding such a regard Vice. In respect 
to our species, he looks upon virtue and vice as permanent reali- 
ties that must ever be the same in all countries and all ages and 
imagines that a man of sound understanding, by following the 
rules of good sense, may not only find out that pulchrwn et hones- 
turn both in morality and the works of art and nature, but likewise 

155 



156 FABLE OF THE BEES 

govern himself by his reason with as much ease and readiness as 
a good rider manages a well-taught horse by the bridle. 

The attentive reader who perused the foregoing part of this book 
will soon perceive that two systems cannot be more opposite than 
his Lordship's and mine. His notions I confess are generous and 
refined; they are a high compliment to human-kind and capable, 
by a little enthusiasm, of inspiring us with the most noble senti- 
ments concerning the dignity of our exalted nature. What a pity 
it is that they are not true. I would not advance thus much if I 
had not already demonstrated in almost every page of this treatise 
that the solidity of them is inconsistent with our daily experience. 
But, to leave not the least shadow of an objection that might be 
made unanswered, I design to expatiate on some things which 
hitherto I have but slightly touched upon in order to convince the 
reader, not only that the good and amiable qualities of men are 
not those that make him beyond other animals a social creature; 
but, moreover, that it would be utterly impossible either to raise 
any multitudes into a populous, rich, and flourishing nation, or, 
when so raised, to keep and maintain them in that condition with- 
out the assistance of what we call Evil, both natural and moral. 

The better to perform what I have undertaken, I shall previously 
examine 'into the reality of the pulchrum et honestum, the to 
kalon that the ancients have talked of so much: the meaning of 
this is to discuss whether there be a real worth and excellency in 
things, a pre-eminence of one above another; which everybody 
will always agree to that well understands them; or, that there are 
few things, if any, that have the same esteem paid them and which 
the same judgement is passed upon in all countries and all ages. 
When we first set out in quest of this intrinsic worth and find one 
thing better than another, and a third better than that, and so on, 
we begin to entertain great hopes of success; but when we meet 
with several things that are all very good or all very bad, we are 
puzzled and agree not always with ourselves, much less with others. 
There are different faults as well as beauties that as modes and 
fashions alter and men vary in their tastes and humours will be 
differently admired or disapproved of. 

Judges of painting will never disagree in opinion when a fine 
picture is compared to the daubing of a novice; but how strangely 
have they differed as to the works of eminent masters! There are 



FABLE OF THE BEES 157 

parties among connoisseurs; and few of them agree in their esteem 
as to ages and countries; and the best pictures bear not always 
the best prices: a noted original will ever be worth more than 
any copy that can be made of it by an unknown hand, though it 
should be better. The value that is set on paintings depends not 
only on the name of the master and the time of his age he drew 
them in, but likewise in a great measure on the scarcity of his 
works; but, what is still more unreasonable, the quality of the 
persons in whose possession they are, as well as the length of 
time they have been in great families; and if the cartoons now at 
Hampton Court were done by a less famous hand than that of 
Raphael and had a private person for their owner who would 
be forced to sell them, they would never yield the tenth part of 
the money which, with all their gross faults, they are now esteemed 
to be worth. 

Notwithstanding all this, I will readily own that the judgement 
to be made of painting might become of universal certainty, or at 
least less alterable and precarious than almost anything else. 
The reason is plain; there is a standard to go by that always 
remains the same. Painting is an imitation of nature, a copying 
of things which men have everywhere before them. My good- 
humoured reader I hope will forgive me if, thinking on this glori- 
ous invention, I make a reflection a little out of season, though 
very much conducive to my main design; which is, that valuable 
as the art is I speak of, we are beholden to an imperfection in the 
chief of our senses for all the pleasures and ravishing delight we 
receive from this happy deceit. I shall explain myself. Air and 
space are no objects of sight, but as soon as we can see with the 
least attention, we observe that the bulk of the things we see is 
lessened by degrees, as they are further remote from us, and 
nothing but experience gained from these observations can teach 
us to make any tolerable guesses at the distance of things. If one 
born blind should remain so till twenty and then be suddenly 
blessed with sight, he would be strangely puzzled as to the differ- 
ence of distances, and hardly able immediately by his eyes alone 
to determine which was nearest to him, a post almost within the 
reach of his stick or a steeple that should be half a mile off. Let 
us look as narrowly as we can upon a hole in a wall that has 
nothing but the open air behind it, and we shall not be able to 



158 FABLE OF THE BEES 

see otherwise but that the sky fills up the vacuity and is as near 
us as the back part of the stones that circumscribe the space where 
they are wanting. This circumstance, not to call it a defect, in our 
sense of seeing makes us liable to be imposed upon, and every- 
thing but motion may by art be represented to us on a flat in the 
same manner as we see them in life and nature. If a man had 
never seen this art put into practice, a looking-glass might soon 
convince him that such a thing was possible, and I cannot help 
thinking but that the reflections from very smooth and well- 
polished bodies made upon our eyes must have given the first 
handle to the inventions of drawings and painting. 

In the works of nature, worth and excellency are as uncertain; 
and even in human creatures, what is beautiful in one country is 
not so in another. How whimsical is the florist in his choice! 
Sometimes the tulip, sometimes the auricula, and at other times 
the carnation shall engross his esteem, and every year a new 
flower, in his judgement, beats all the old ones, though it is much 
inferior to them in colour and shape. Three hundred years ago 
men were shaved as closely as they are now. Since that they have 
wore beards and cut them in vast variety of forms that were all as 
becoming, when fashionable, as now they would be ridiculous. 
How mean and comically a man looks that is otherwise well 
dressed, in a narrow-brimmed hat when everybody wears broad 
ones; and again, how monstrous is a very great hat when the 
other extreme has been in fashion for a considerable time? Ex- 
perience has taught us that these modes seldom last above ten or 
twelve years, and a man of threescore must have observed five or 
six revolutions of them at least! Yet the beginning of these changes, 
though we have seen several, seem always uncouth and are offen- 
sive afresh whenever they return. What mortal can decide which 
is the handsomest, abstract from the mode in being, to wear 
great buttons or small ones? The many ways of laying out a gar- 
den judiciously are almost innumerable; and what is called beau- 
tiful in them, varies according to the different tastes of nations 
and ages. In grass plats,* knots and parterres, a great diversity of 
forms is generally agreeable; but a round may be more pleasing 
to the eye as a square: an oval cannot be more suitable to one 



* plats plots. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 159 

place than it is possible for a triangle to be to another; and the 
pre-eminence an octagon has over an hexagon is no greater hi 
figures than at hazard eight has above six among the chances. 

Churches, ever since Christians have been able to build them, 
resemble the form of a cross, with the upper end pointing toward 
the east; and an architect, where there is room and it can be 
conveniently done, who should neglect it, would be thought to 
have committed an unpardonable fault; but it would be foolish 
to expect this of a Turkish mosque or a Pagan temple. Among the 
many beneficial laws that have been made these hundred years, 
it is not easy to name one of greater utility and, at the same time, 
more exempt from all inconveniences than that which has regu- 
lated the dresses of the dead. Those who were old enough to take 
notice of things when that act was made and are yet alive must 
remember the general clamour that was made against it. At first, 
nothing could be more shocking to thousands of people than they 
were to be buried in woollen, and the only thing that made that law 
supportable was that there was room left for people of some fash- 
ion to indulge their weakness without extravagancy, considering 
the other expences of funerals where mourning is given to several 
and rings to a great many. The benefit that accrues to the nation 
from it is so visible that nothing ever could be said in reason to 
condemn it, which, in few years, made the horror conceived against 
it lessen every day. I observed then that young people, who had 
seen but few in their coffins, did the soonest strike hi with the 
innovation; but that those who, when the act was made, had 
buried many friends and relations, remained averse to it the long- 
est, and I remember many that never could be reconciled to it 
to their dying day. By this time, burying in linen being almost 
forgot, it is the general opinion that nothing could be more decent 
than woollen and the present manner of dressing a corpse; which 
shows that our liking and disliking of things chiefly depends on 
mode and custom, and the precept and example of our betters, and 
such whom one way or other we think to be superior to us. 

In morals there is no greater certainty. Plurality of wives is 
odious among Christians, and all the wit and learning of a great 
genius in defence of it has been rejected with contempt.* But 



'Perhaps Sir Thomas More. See Kaye, I, 330 n. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 

polygamy is not shocking to a Mahometan. What men have learned 
from their infancy enslaves them, and the force of custom warps 
nature and, at the same time, imitates her in such a manner that 
it is often difficult to know which of the two we are influenced by. 
In the east, formerly sisters married brothers, and it was meri- 
torious for a man to marry his mother. Such alliances are abomi- 
nable; but it is certain that, whatever horror we conceive at the 
thoughts of them, there is nothing in nature repugnant against 
them but what is built upon mode and custom. A religious Ma- 
hometan that has never tasted any spirituous liquor and has often 
seen people drunk, may receive as great an aversion against wine 
as another with us of the least morality and education may have 
against lying with his sister, and both imagine that their antipathy 
proceeds from nature. Which is the best religion is a question 
that has caused more mischief than all other questions together. 
Ask it at Pekin, at Constantinople, and at Rome, and you will 
receive three distinct answers extremely different from one another, 
yet all of them equally positive and peremptory. Christians are 
well assured of the falsity of the Pagan and Mahometan super- 
stitions: as to this point, there is a perfect union and concord 
among them; but inquire of the several sects they are divided into, 
Which is* the true church of Christ? and all of them will tell you 
it is theirs and to convince you, go together by the ears. 

It is manifest, then, that the hunting after this pulchrum et 
honestum is not much better than a wild-goose chase that is but 
little to be depended on. But this is not the greatest fault I find 
with it. The imaginary notions that men may be virtuous without 
self-denial are a vast inlet to hypocrisy; which being once made 
habitual, we must not only deceive others, but likewise become 
altogether unknown to ourselves; and in an instance I am going 
to give, it will appear how, for want of duly examining himself, 
this might happen to a person of quality, of parts, and erudition, 
one every way resembling the author of the Ckaracteristicks himself. 

A man that has been brought up in ease and affluence, if he is 
of a quiet indolent nature, learns to shun everything that is trou- 
blesome and chooses to curb his passions more because of the 
inconveniences that arise from the eager pursuit after pleasure, 
and the yielding to all the demands of our inclinations, than any 
dislike he has to sensual enjoyments; and it is possible, that a 



FABLE OF THE BEES 161 

person educated under a great philosopher who was a mild and 
good-natured as well as able tutor may, in such happy circum- 
stances, have a better opinion of his inward state than it really 
deserves, and believe himself virtuous because his passions lie 
dormant. He may form fine notions of the social virtues and the 
contempt of death, write well of them in his closet, and talk elo- 
quently of them in company, but you shall never catch him fighting 
for his country or labouring to retrieve any national losses. A man 
that deals in metaphysics may easily throw himself into an enthusi- 
asm and really believe that he does not fear death while it remains 
out of sight. But should he be asked why, having this intrepidity 
either from nature or acquired by philosophy, he did not follow 
arms when his country was involved in war; or when he saw the 
nation daily robbed by those at the helm and the affairs of the 
exchequer perplexed, why he did not go to court and make use of 
all his friends and interest to be a lord treasurer that by his integrity 
and wise management he might restore the public credit, it is 
probable he would answer that he loved retirement, had no other 
ambition than to be a good man, and never aspired to have any 
share in the government; or that he hated all flattery and slavish 
attendance, the insincerity of courts and bustle of the world. I am 
willing to believe him, but may not a man of an indolent temper 
and unactive spirit say and be sincere in all this and, at the same 
time, indulge his appetites without being able to subdue them, 
though his duty summons him to it. Virtue consists in action, and 
whoever is possessed of this social love and kind affection to his 
species and by his birth or quality can claim any post in the public 
management, ought not to sit still when he can be serviceable, 
but exert himself to the utmost for the good of his fellow subjects. 
Had this noble person been of a warlike genius or a boisterous 
temper, he would have chose another part in the drama of life 
and preached a quite contrary doctrine. For we are ever pushing 
our reason which way soever we feel passion to draw it, and self- 
love pleads to all human creatures for their different views, still 
furnishing every individual with arguments to justify their in- 
clinations. 

That boasted middle way and the calm virtues recommended hi 
the Characteristicks are good for nothing but to breed drones, and 
might qualify a man for the stupid enjoyments of a monastic life 



162 FABLE OF THE BEES 

or at best a country justice of peace, but they would never fit 
him for labour and assiduity or stir him up to great achievements 
and perilous undertakings. Man's natural love of ease and idleness 
and proneness to indulge his sensual pleasures are not to be cured 
by precept; his strong habits and inclinations can only be subdued 
by passions of greater violence. Preach and demonstrate to a 
coward the unreasonableness of his fears, and you will not make 
him valiant more than you can make him taller by bidding him to 
be ten foot high, whereas the secret to raise courage, as I have 
made it public in Remark on 1. 321, is almost infallible. 

The fear of death is the strongest when we are in our greatest 
vigour and our appetite is keen, when we are sharp-sighted, quick 
of hearing, and every part performs its office. The reason is plain, 
because then life is most delicious and ourselves most capable 
of enjoying it. How comes it, then, that a man of honour should 
so easily accept of a challenge, though at thirty and in perfect 
health? It is his pride that conquers his fear; for, when his pride 
is not concerned, this fear will appear most glaringly. If he is not 
used to the sea, let him but be in a storm or, if he never was ill 
before, have but a sore throat or a slight fever, and he will show 
a thousand anxieties and in them the inestimable value he sets 
on life. 'Had man been naturally humble and proof against flattery, 
the politician could never have had his ends or known what to 
have made of him. Without vices, the excellency of the species 
would have ever remained undiscovered, and every worthy that has 
made himself famous in the world is a strong evidence against this 
amiable system. 

If the courage of the great Macedonian [Alexander] came up 
to distraction when he fought alone against a whole garrison, his 
madness was not less when he fancied himself to be a god or at 
least doubted whether he was or not; and as soon as we make 
this reflection, we discover both the passion and the extravagancy 
of it that buoyed up his spirits in the most imminent dangers and 
carried him through all the difficulties and fatigues he underwent. 

There never was in the world a brighter example of an able and 
complete magistrate than Cicero. When I think on his care and 
vigilance, the real hazards he slighted, and the pains he took for 
the safety of Rome, his wisdom and sagacity in detecting and dis- 
appointing 4he stratagems of the boldest and most subtle conspir- 



FABLE OF THE BEES 163 

ators, and, at the same time, on his love to literature, arts, and 
sciences, his capacity in metaphysics, the justness of his reason- 
ings, the force of his eloquence, the politeness of his style, and 
the genteel spirit that runs through his writings; when I think, I 
say, on all these things together, I am struck with amazement, 
and the least I can say of him is that he was a prodigious man. 
But when I have set the many good qualities he had in the best 
light, it is as evident to me on the other side that had his vanity 
been inferior to his greatest excellency, the good sense and knowl- 
edge of the world he was so eminently possessed of could never 
have let him be such a fulsome as well as noisy trumpeter as he 
was of his own praises, or suffered him rather than not proclaim 
his own merit to make a verse that a school boy would have been 
laughed at for. O! Fortunatam, &c. 

How strict and severe was the morality of rigid Cato, how 
steady and unaffected the virtue of that grand asserter of Roman 
liberty! But though the equivalent this stoic enjoyed, for all the 
self-denial and austerity he practiced, remained long concealed, 
and his peculiar modesty hid from the world and perhaps himself 
a vast while the frailty of his heart that forced him into heroism, 
yet it was brought to light in the last scene of his life, and by his 
suicide it plainly appeared that he was governed by a tyrannical 
power, superior to the love of his country, and that the implacable 
hatred and superlative envy he bore to the glory, the real great- 
ness and personal merit of Caesar had for a long time swayed all 
his actions under the most noble pretences. Had not this violent 
motive over-ruled his consummate prudence, he might not only 
have saved himself, but likewise most of his friends that were 
ruined by the loss of him and would in all probability, if he could 
have stooped to it, been the second man in Rome. But he knew 
the boundless mind and unlimited generosity of the victor; it was 
his clemency he feared, and therefore chose death because it was 
less terrible to his pride than the thoughts of giving his mortal foe 
so tempting an opportunity of showing the magnanimity of his 
soul, as Caesar would have found in forgiving such an inveterate 
enemy as Cato and offering him his friendship; and which, it is 
thought by the judicious, that penetrating as well as ambitious con- 
queror would not have slipped if the other had dared to live. 

Another argument to prove the land of disposition and real 



164 FABLE OF THE BEES 

affection we naturally have for our species is our love of company 
and the aversion men that are in their senses generally have to 
solitude, beyond any other creatures. This bears a fine gloss in 
the Characteristicks and is set off in very good language to the 
best advantage; the next day after I read it first, I heard abundance 
of people cry fresh herrings, which, with the reflexion on 
the vast shoals of that and other fish that are caught together, 
made me very merry, though I was alone; but as I was entertain- 
ing myself with this contemplation came an impertinent idle fellow 
whom I had the misfortune to be known by and asked me how I 
did, though I was and dare say looked as healthy and as well as 
ever I was or did in my life. What I answered him I forgot, but 
remember that I could not get rid of him in a good while and 
felt all the uneasiness my friend Horace complains of from a 
persecution of the like nature. 

I would have no sagacious critic pronounce me a man-hater 
from this short story; whoever does is very much mistaken. I am 
a great lover of company and, if the reader is not quite tired with 
mine, before I show the weakness and ridicule of that piece of 
flattery made to our species and which I was just now speaking 
of, I will give him a description of the man I would choose for 
conversation, with a promise that before he has finished what at 
first he might only take for a digression foreign to my purpose, 
he shall find the use of it. 

By early and artful instruction he should be thoroughly imbued 
with the notions of honour and shame and have contracted an 
habitual aversion to everything that has the least tendency to 
impudence, rudeness, or inhumanity. He should be well versed 
in the Latin tongue and not ignorant of the Greek and moreover 
understand one or two of the modern languages besides his own. 
He should be acquainted with the fashions and customs of the 
ancients, but thoroughly skilled in the history of his own country 
and the manners of the age he lives in. He should besides litera- 
ture have studied some useful science or other, seen some foreign 
courts and universities, and made the true use of travelling. He 
should at times take delight in dancing, fencing, riding the great 
horse, and knowing something of hunting and other country 
sports, without being attached to any, and he should treat them 
all as either exercises for health or diversions that should never 



FABLE OF THE BEES 165 

interfere with business or the attaining to more valuable qualifi- 
cations. He should have a smatch of geometry and astronomy, as 
well as anatomy, and the economy of human bodies; to understand 
music so as to perform is an accomplishment, but there is abun- 
dance to be said against it; and instead of it, I would have him 
know so much of drawing as is required to take a landscape or 
explain one's meaning of any form or model we would describe, 
but never to touch a pencil. He should be very early used to the 
company of modest women and never be a fortnight without con- 
versing with the ladies. 

Gross vices, as irreligion, whoring, gaming, drinking, and quar- 
relling, I will not mention; even the meanest education guards us 
against them; I would always recommend to him the practice of 
virtue, but I am for no voluntary ignorance in a gentleman of 
anything that is done in court or city. It is impossible a man should 
be perfect, and therefore there are faults I would connive at if 
I could not prevent them; and if between the years of nineteen and 
three-and-twenty, youthful heat should sometimes get the better of 
his chastity, so it was done with caution; should he on some 
extraordinary occasion, overcome by the pressing solicitations of 
jovial friends, drink more than was consistent with strict sobriety, 
so he did it very seldom, and found it not to interfere with his 
health or temper; or if by the height of his mettle and great provo- 
cation in a just cause, he had been drawn into a quarrel which 
true wisdom and a less strict adherence to the rules of honour 
might have declined or prevented, so it never befell him above 
once; if, I say, he should have happened to be guilty of these things, 
and he would never speak much less brag of them himself, they 
might be pardoned, or at least overlooked at the age I named, if 
he left off then and continued discreet forever after. The very 
disasters of youth have sometimes frightened gentlemen into a 
more steady prudence than in all probability they would ever have 
been masters of without them. To keep him from turpitude and 
things that are openly scandalous, there is nothing better than to 
procure him free access in one or two noble families where his 
frequent attendance is counted a duty; and while by that means 
you preserve bis pride, he is kept in a continual dread of shame. 

A man of a tolerable fortune, pretty near accomplished as I have 
required him to be, that still improves himself and sees the world 



166 FABLE OF THE BEES 

till he is thirty, cannot be disagreeable to converse with, at least 
while he continues in health and prosperity and has nothing to 
spoil his temper. When such a one, either by chance or appoint- 
ment, meets with three or four of our equals and all agree to pass 
away a few hours together, the whole is what I call good company. 
There is nothing said in it that is not either instructive or diverting 
to a man of sense. It is possible they may not always be of the 
same opinion, but there can be no contest between any but who 
shall yield first to the other he differs from. One only speaks at 
a time and no louder than to be plainly understood by him who 
sits the farthest off. The greatest pleasure aimed at by every one 
of them is to have the satisfaction of pleasing others, which they 
all practically know may as effectually be done by hearkening with 
attention and an approving countenance, as if we said very good 
things ourselves. 

Most people of any taste would like such a conversation and 
justly prefer it to being alone when they knew not how to spend 
their time; but if they could employ themselves in something from 
which they expected either a more solid or a more lasting satis- 
faction, they would deny themselves this pleasure and follow what 
was of greater consequence to them. But would not a man, though 
he had seen no mortal in a fortnight, remain alone as much longer 
rather than get into company of noisy fellows that take delight 
in contradiction and place a glory in picking a quarrel? Would 
not one that has books read forever or set himself to write upon 
some subject or other rather than be every night with party-men 
who count the island to be good for nothing while their adver- 
saries are suffered to live upon it? Would not a man be by himself 
a month and go to bed before seven a clock rather than mix with 
fox-hunters, who, having all day long tried in vain to break their 
necks, join at night in a second attempt upon their lives by drink- 
ing, and to express their mirth are louder in senseless sounds 
within doors than their barking and less troublesome companions 
are only without? I have no great value for a man who would not 
rather tire himself with walking, or if he was shut up scatter pins 
about the room in order to pick them up again, than keep com- 
pany for six hours with half a score common sailors the day their 
ship was paid off. 

I will grant, nevertheless, that the greatest part of mankind, 



FABLE OF THE BEES 167 

rather than be alone any considerable time, would submit to the 
things I named; but I cannot see why this love of company, this 
strong desire after society, should be construed so much hi our 
favour and alleged as a mark of some intrinsic worth in man not 
to be found in other animals. For to prove from it the goodness 
of our nature and a generous love in man, extended beyond him- 
self on the rest of his species, by virtue of which he was a sociable 
creature, this eagerness after company and aversion of being 
alone ought to have been the most conspicuous and most violent 
in the best of their kind, the men of the greatest genius, parts, and 
accomplishments, and those who are the least subject to vice; 
the contrary of which is true. The weakest minds, who can the 
least govern, their passions, guilty consciences that abhor reflection, 
and the worthless who are incapable of producing anything of 
their own that is useful, are the greatest enemies to solitude and 
will take up with any company rather than be without; whereas 
the men of sense and of knowledge that can think and contemplate 
on things and such as are but little disturbed by their passions 
can bear to be by themselves the longest without reluctancy; and 
to avoid noise, folly, and impertinence will run away from twenty 
companies; and rather than meet with anything disagreeable to 
their good taste will prefer their closet or a garden, nay, a com- 
mon or a desert, to the society of some men. 

But let us suppose the love of company so inseparable from 
our species that no man could endure to be alone one moment, 
what conclusions could be drawn from this? Does not man love 
company, as he does everything else, for his own sake? No friend- 
ships or civilities are lasting that are not reciprocal. In all your 
weekly and daily meetings for diversion, as well as annual feasts 
and the most solemn carousals, every member that assists at 
them has his own ends, and some frequent a club which they would 
never go to unless they were the top of it. I have known a man 
who was the oracle of the company, be very constant, and as 
uneasy at anything that hindered him from coming at the hour, 
leave his society altogether, as soon as another was added that 
could match, and disputed superiority with him. There are people 
who are incapable of holding an argument and yet malicious 
enough to take delight in hearing others wrangle; and though they 
never concern themselves hi the controversy, would think a com- 



168 FABLE OF THE BEES 

pany insipid where they could not have that diversion. A good 
house, rich furniture, a fine garden, horses, dogs, ancestors, rela- 
tions, beauty, strength, excellency in anything whatever; vices as 
well as virtue may all be accessary to make men long for society, 
in hopes that what they value themselves upon will at one time or 
other become the theme of the discourse and give an inward 
satisfaction to them. Even the most polite people in the world and 
such as I spoke of at first give no pleasure to others that is not 
repaid to their self-love and does not at last centre in themselves, 
let them wind it and turn it as they will. But the plainest demon- 
stration that in all clubs and societies of conversable people every- 
body has the greatest consideration for himself, is that the dis- 
interested who rather overpays than wrangles, the good humoured 
that is never waspish nor soon offended, the easy and indolent 
that hates disputes and never talks for triumph, is everywhere the 
darling of the company; whereas the man of sense and knowledge 
that will not be imposed upon or talked out of his reason, the man 
of genius and spirit that can say sharp and witty things though 
he never lashes but what deserves it, the man of honour who 
neither gives nor takes an affront, may be esteemed, but is seldom 
so well beloved as a weaker man less accomplished. 

As in 'these instances the friendly qualities arise from our con- 
triving perpetually our own satisfaction, so on other occasions 
they proceed from the natural timidity of man and the solicitous 
care he takes of himself. Two Londoners whose business oblige 
them not to have any commerce together, may know, see, and 
pass by one another every day upon the Exchange with not much 
greater civility than bulls would: let them meet at Bristol they 
will pull off their hats, and on the least opportunity enter into 
conversation, and be glad of one another's company. When French, 
English, and Dutch meet in China, or any other pagan country, 
being all Europeans, they look upon one another as countrymen, 
and if no passion interferes, will feel a natural propensity to love 
one another. Nay, two men that are at enmity, if they are forced to 
travel together, will often lay by their animosities, be affable, and 
converse in a friendly manner, especially if the road be unsafe 
and they are both strangers in the place they are to go to. These 
things by superficial judges are attributed to man's sociableness, 
his natural propensity to friendship and love of company; but 



FABLE OF THE BEES 169 

whoever will duly examine things and look into man more narrowly 
will find that on all these occasions we only endeavour to strengthen 
our interest and are moved by the causes already alleged. 

What I have endeavoured hitherto has been to prove that the 
pulchrum et honestum, excellency and real worth of things are 
most commonly precarious and alterable as modes and customs 
vary; that consequently the inferences drawn from their certainty 
are insignificant, and that the generous notions concerning the 
natural goodness of man are hurtful, as they tend to mislead, and 
are merely chimerical: the truth of this latter I have illustrated 
by the most obvious examples in history. I have spoke of our love 
of company and aversion to solitude, examined thoroughly the 
various motives of them, and made it appear that they all centre 
in self-love. I intend now to investigate into the nature of society, 
and diving into the very rise of it, make it evident that not the 
good and amiable, but the bad and hateful qualities of man, his 
imperfections and the want of excellencies which other creatures 
are endued with, are the first causes that made man sociable beyond 
other animals, the moment after he lost Paradise; and that if he 
had remained in his primitive innocence and continued to enjoy 
the blessings that attended it, there is no shadow of probability 
that he ever would have become that sociable creature he is now. 

How necessary our appetites and passions are for the welfare 
of all trades and handicrafts has been sufficiently proved through- 
out the book, and that they are our bad qualities, or at least pro- 
duce them, nobody denies. It remains then that I should set forth 
the valriety of obstacles that hinder and perplex man in the labour 
he is constantly employed in, the procuring of what he wants, 
and which in other words is called the business of self-preservation; 
while at the same time I demonstrate that the sociableness of man 
arises only from these two things, viz. the multiplicity of his desires 
and the continual opposition he meets with in his endeavours to 
gratify them. 

The obstacles I speak of relate either to our own frame or the 
globe we inhabit, I mean the condition of it, since it has been 
cursed. I have often endeavoured to contemplate separately on the 
two things I named last, but could never keep them asunder; they 
always interfere and mix with one another; and at last make up 
together a frightful chaos of evil. All the elements are our enemies, 



170 FABLE OF THE BEES 

water drowns and fire consumes those who unskilfully approach 
them. The earth hi a thousand places produces plants and other 
vegetables that are hurtful to man, while she feeds and cherishes 
a variety of creatures that are noxious to him, and suffers a legion 
of poisons to dwell within her. But the most unkind of all the 
elements is that which we cannot live one moment without; it is 
impossible to repeat all the injuries we receive from the wind and 
weather, and though the greatest part of mankind have ever been 
employed in defending their species from the inclemency of the 
air, yet no art or labour have hitherto been able to find a security 
against the wild rage of some meteors. 

Hurricanes, it is true, happen but seldom, and few men are 
swallowed up by earthquakes or devoured by lions; but while we 
escape those gigantic mischiefs, we are persecuted by trifles. What 
a vast variety of insects are tormenting to us; what multitudes of 
them insult and make game of us with impunity! The most despica- 
ble scruple not to trample and graze upon us as cattle do upon a 
field, which yet is often borne with if moderately they use their 
fortune; but here again our clemency becomes a vice, and so 
encroaching are their cruelty and contempt of us on our pity that 
they make laystalls* of our hands and devour our young ones if 
we are' not daily vigilant in pursuing and destroying them. 

There is nothing good in all the universe to the best-designing 
man, if either through mistake or ignorance he commits the least 
failing in the use of it; there is no innocence or integrity that can 
protect a man from a thousand mischiefs that surround him; on 
the contrary, everything is evil which art and experience have not 
taught us to turn into a blessing. Therefore how diligent in harvest 
time is the husbandman in getting in his crop and sheltering it from 
rain without which he could never have enjoyed it! As seasons 
differ with the climates, experience has taught us differently to 
make use of them, and in one part of the globe we may see the 
farmer sow while he is reaping in the other; from all which we 
may learn how vastly this earth must have been altered since the 
fall of our first parents. For should we trace man from his beau- 
tiful, his divine original, not proud of wisdom acquired by haughty 
precept or tedious experience, but endued with consummate knowl- 



* lay stall a dump, or midden. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 171 



edge the moment he was formed; I mean the state of innocence, 
in which no animal nor vegetable upon earth, nor mineral under 
ground was noxious to him, and himself secured from the injuries 
of the air as well as all other harms, was contented with the neces- 
saries of life which the globe he inhabited furnished him with 
without his assistance. When yet not conscious of guilt, he found 
himself in every place to be the well-obeyed, unrivalled lord of 
all, and unaffected with his greatness, was wholly wrapped up hi 
sublime meditations on the infinity of his Creator, who daily did 
vouchsafe intelligibly to speak to him and visit without mischief. 

In such a golden age, no reason or probability can be alleged 
why mankind ever should have raised themselves into such large 
societies as there have been in the world, as long as we can give 
any tolerable account of it. Where a man has everything he desires 
and nothing to vex or disturb him, there is nothing can be added 
to his happiness; and it is impossible to name a trade, art, science, 
dignity, or employment that would not be superfluous in such a 
blessed state. If we pursue this thought, we shall easily perceive 
that no societies could have sprung from the amiable virtues and 
loving qualities of man; but, on the contrary, that all of them 
must have had their origin from his wants, his imperfections, and 
the variety of his appetites; we shall find likewise that the more 
their pride and vanity are displayed and all their desires enlarged, 
the more capable they must be of being raised into large and 
numerous societies. 

Was the air always as inoffensive to our naked bodies and as 
pleasant as to our thinking it is to the generality of birds in fair 
weather and man had not been affected with pride, luxury and 
hypocrisy, as well as lust, I cannot see what could have put us 
upon the invention of clothes and houses. I shall say nothing of 
jewels, of plate, painting, sculpture, fine furniture, and all that 
rigid moralists have called unnecessary and superfluous; but if 
we were not soon tired with walking a-foot and were as nimble as 
some other animals; if men were naturally laborious and none 
unreasonable in seeking and indulging their ease, and likewise free 
from other vices, and the ground was everywhere even, solid, and 
clean, who would have thought of coaches or ventured on a horse's 
back? What occasion has the dolphin for a ship, or what carriage 
would an eagle ask to travel in? 



172 FABLE OF THE BEES 



I hope the reader knows that by society I understand a body 
politic, in which man either subdued by superior force, or by 
persuasion drawn from his savage state, is become a disciplined 
creature that can find his own ends in labouring for others, and 
where under one head or other form of government each member 
is rendered subservient to the whole, and all of them by cunning 
management are made to act as one. For if by society we only 
mean a number of people that without rule or government should 
keep together out of a natural affection to their species or love 
of company, as a herd of cows or a flock of sheep, then there is 
not hi the world a more unfit creature for society than man; an 
hundred of them that should be all equals under no subjection or 
fear of any superior upon earth could never live together awake 
two hours without quarrelling, and the more knowledge, strength, 
wit, courage and resolution there was among them, the worse it 
would be. 

It is probable that hi the wild state of nature, parents would 
keep a superiority over their children, at least while they were in 
strength, and that even afterwards, the remembrance of what the 
others had experienced might produce in them something between 
love and fear, which we call reverence; it is probable, likewise, 
that the second generation following the example of the first, a 
man with a little cunning would always be able, as long as he 
lived and had his senses, to maintain a superior sway over all his 
own offspring and descendants, how numerous soever they might 
grow. But the old stock once dead, the sons would quarrel, and 
there could be no peace long, before there had been war. Eldership 
in brothers is of no great force, and the pre-eminence that is given 
to it only invented as a shift to live in peace. Man, as he is a fear- 
ful animal, naturally not rapacious, loves peace and quiet, and he 
would never fight if nobody offended him and he could have what 
he fights for without it. To this fearful disposition and the aver- 
sion he has to his being disturbed are owing all the various projects 
and forms of government. Monarchy, without doubt, was the first. 
Aristocracy and democracy were two different methods of mend- 
ing the inconveniences of the first, and a mixture of these three 
an improvement on all the rest. 

But be we savages or politicians, it is impossible that man, 
mere fallen man, should act with any other view but to please 



FABLE OF THE BEES 173 

himself while he has the use of his organs, and the greatest extrava- 
gancy either of love or despair can have no other centre. There 
is no difference between will and pleasure hi one sense, and every 
motion made in spite of them must be unnatural and convulsive. 
Since, then, action is so confined, and we are always forced to do 
what we please, and at the same tune our thoughts are free and 
uncontrolled, it is impossible we could be sociable creatures with- 
out hypocrisy. The proof of this is plain. Since we cannot prevent 
the ideas that are continually arising within us, all civil commerce 
would be lost, if by art and prudent dissimulation we had had not 
learned to hide and stifle them; and if all we think was to be laid 
open to others in the same manner as it is to ourselves, it is 
impossible that, endued with speech, we could be sufferable to 
one another. I am persuaded that every reader feels the truth of 
what I say; and I tell my antagonist that his conscience flies in 
his face, while his tongue is preparing to refute me. In all civil 
societies men are taught insensibly to be hypocrites from their 
cradle; nobody dares to own that* he gets by public calamities or 
even by the loss of private persons. The sexton would be stoned 
should he wish openly for the death of the parishoners, though 
everybody knew that he had nothing else to live upon. 

To me it is a great pleasure, when I look on the affairs of human 
life, to behold into what various and often strangely opposite forms 
the hopes of gain and thoughts of lucre shape men, according to 
the different employments they are of and stations they are in. 
How gay and merry does every face appear at a well-ordered ball, 
and what a solemn sadness is observed at the masquerade of a 
funeral! But the undertaker is as much pleased with his gains as 
the dancing master: both are equally tired in the occupations, and 
the mirth of one is as much forced as the gravity of the other is 
affected. Those who have never minded the conversation of a 
spruce mercer and a young lady, his customer, that comes to his 
shop, have neglected a scene of life that is very entertaining. I 
beg of my serious reader that he would for a while abate a little 
of his gravity, and suffer me to examine these people separately, 
as to their inside, and the different motives they act from. 

His business is to sell as much silk as he can at a price by which 



*that that which. 



174 FABLE OF THE BEES 

he shall get what he proposes to be reasonable, according to the 
customary profits of the trade. As to the lady, what she would be 
at is to please her fancy and buy cheaper by a groat or sixpence 
per yard than the things she wants are commonly sold at. From 
the impression the gallantry of our sex has made upon her, she 
imagines (if she be not very deformed) that she has a fine mien 
and easy behaviour and a peculiar sweetness of voice; that she 
is handsome, and, if not beautiful, at least more agreeable than 
most young women she knows. As she has no pretensions to pur- 
chase the same thing with less money than other people but what 
are built on her good qualities, so she sets herself off to the best 
advantage her wit and discretion will let her. The thoughts of 
love are here out of the case; so on the one hand, she has no room 
for playing the tyrant and giving herself angry and peevish airs 
and, on the other, more liberty of speaking kindly and being 
affable than she can have almost on any other occasion. She knows 
that abundance of well-bred people come to his shop and en- 
deavours to render herself as amiable as virtue and the rules of 
decency allow of. Coming with such a resolution of behaviour, she 
cannot meet with anything to ruffle her temper. 

Before her coach is yet quite stopped, she is approached by 
a gentleman-like man, that has everything clean and fashionable 
about him, who in low obeisance pays her homage, and as soon 
as her pleasure is known that she has a mind to come in, hands 
her into the shop, where immediately he slips from her, and 
through a by-way that remains visible only for half a moment, 
with great address entrenches himself behind the counter; here 
facing her, with a profound reverence and modish phrase, he 
begs the favour of knowing her commands. Let her say and dis- 
like what she pleases, she can never be directly contradicted: she 
deals with a man in whom consummate patience is one of the 
mysteries of his trade, and whatever trouble she creates she is sure 
to hear nothing but the most obliging language and has always 
before her a cheerful countenance, where joy and respect seem 
to be blended with good humour and altogether make up an 
artificial serenity more engaging than untaught nature is able to 
produce. 

When two persons are so well met, the conversation must be 
very agreeable as well as extremely mannerly, though they talk 



FABLE OF THE BEES 175 

about trifles. While she remains irresolute what to take, he seems 
to be the same in advising her and is very cautious how to direct 
her choice; but when once she has made it and is fixed, he im- 
mediately becomes positive that it is the best of the sort, extols 
her fancy, and the more he looks upon it, the more he wonders 
he should not before have discovered the pre-eminence of it over 
anything he has in his shop. By precept, example, and great appli- 
cation, he has learned unobserved to slide into the inmost recesses 
of the soul, sound the capacity of his customers, and find out their 
blind side unknown to them: by all which he is instructed in fifty 
other stratagems to make her over-value her own judgment as 
well as the commodity she would purchase. The greatest advan- 
tage he has oyer her lies in the most material part of the com- 
merce between them, the debate about the price, which he knows 
to a farthing and she is wholly ignorant of; therefore he nowhere 
more egregiously imposes on her understanding; and though here 
he has the liberty of telling what lies he pleases as to the prime 
cost and the money he has refused, yet he trusts not to them 
only, but, attacking her vanity, makes her believe the most in- 
credible things in the world concerning his own weakness and her 
superior abilities; he had taken a resolution, he says, never to 
part with that piece under such a price, but she has the power 
of talking him out of his goods beyond anybody he ever sold to; 
he protests that he loses by his silk, but seeing that she has a 
fancy for it and is resolved to give no more, rather than disoblige 
a lady he has such an uncommon value for, he will let her have 
it and only begs that another time she will not stand so hard with 
him. In the meantime, the buyer, who knows that she is no fool, 
and has a voluble tongue, is easily persuaded that she has a very 
winning way of talking, and thinking it sufficient for the sake of 
good breeding to disown her merit and in some witty repartee 
retort the compliment, he makes her swallow very contentedly 
the substance of everything he tells her. The upshot is that, with 
the satisfaction of having saved ninepence per yard, she has 
bought her silk exactly at the same price as anybody else might 
have done, and often gives sixpence more than, rather than not 
have sold it, he would have taken. 

It is possible that this lady, for want of being sufficiently flat- 
tered, for a fault she is pleased to find in his behaviour, or per- 



176 FABLE OF THE BEES 

haps the tying of neckcloth, or some other dislike as substantial, 
may be lost, and her custom bestowed on some other of the 
fraternity. But where many of them live in a cluster, it is not 
always easily determined which shop to go to, and the reasons 
some of the fair sex have for their choice are often very whimsical 
and kept as great a secret. We never follow our inclinations with 
more freedom than where they cannot be traced, and it is unreason- 
able for others to suspect them. A virtuous woman has preferred 
one house to all the rest because she had seen a handsome fellow 
in it, and another of no bad character for having received greater 
civility before it than had been paid her anywhere else, when she 
had no thoughts of buying and was going to Paul's church; for 
among the fashionable mercers, the fair dealer must keep before 
his own door, and to draw in random customers, make use of no 
other freedom or importunities than an obsequious air, with a 
submissive posture, and perhaps a bow to every well-dressed 
female that offers to look towards his shop. 

What I have said last makes me think on another way of inviting 
customers, the most distant in the world from what I have been 
speaking of, I mean that which is practiced by the waterman, 
especially on those whom by their mien and garb they know to 
be peasants. It is not unpleasant to see a half a dozen people sur- 
round a man they never saw in their lives before, and two of them 
that can get the nearest, clapping each an arm over his neck, hug 
him in as loving and familiar manner as if he was their brother 
newly come home from an East India voyage; a third lays hold 
of his hand, another of his sleeve, his coat, the buttons of it, or 
anything he can come at, while a fifth or a sixth, who has scam- 
pered twice around him already without being able to get at him, 
plants himself directly before the man in hold, and within three 
inches of his nose, contradicting his rivals with an open-mouthed 
cry, shows him a dreadful set of large teeth and a small remainder 
of chewed bread and cheese which the countryman's arrival had 
hindered from being swallowed. 

At all this no offence is taken, and the peasant justly thinks they 
are making much of him; therefore, far from opposing them, he 
patiently suffers himself to be pushed or pulled which way the 
strength that surrounds him shall direct. He has not the delicacy 
to find fault with a man's breath, who has just blown out his pipe, 



FABLE OF THE BEES 177 

or a greasy head of hair that is rubbing against his chops. Dirt 
and sweat he has been used to from his cradle, and it is no dis- 
turbance to him to hear half a score people, some of them at his 
ear, and the furthest not five foot from him, bawl out as if he was 
a hundred yards off. He is conscious that he makes no less noise 
when he is merry himself and is secretly pleased with their boister- 
ous usages. The hauling and pulling him about he construes the 
way it is intended; it is a courtship he can feel and understand. 
He cannot help wishing them well for the esteem they seem to 
have for him: he loves to be taken notice of, and admires the 
Londoners for being so pressing in the offers of their service to 
him for the value of threepence or less; whereas in the country 
at the shop he uses, he can have nothing but he must first tell them 
what he wants and, though he lays out three or four shillings at a 
time, has hardly a word spoke to him unless it be in answer to a 
question himself is forced to ask first. This alacrity in his behalf 
moves his gratitude and, unwilling to disoblige any, from his heart 
he knows not whom to choose. I have seen a man think all this or 
something like it as plainly as I could see the nose in his face; 
and, at the same time, move along very contentedly under a load 
of watermen, and with a smiling countenance carry seven or 
eight stone more than his own weight to the water side. 

If the little mirth I have shown in the drawing of these two 
images from low life misbecomes me, I am sorry for it, but I 
promise not to be guilty of that fault any more, and will now, 
without loss of t : me, proceed with my argument in artless dull 
simplicity, and demonstrate the gross error of those who imagine 
that the social virtues and the amiable qualities that are praise- 
worthy in us are equally beneficial to the public as they are to 
the individual persons that are possessed of them, and that the 
means of thriving, and whatever conduces to the welfare and real 
happiness of private families, must have the same effect upon the 
whole society. This, I confess, I have laboured for all along, and I 
flatter myself not unsuccessfully. But I hope nobody will like a 
problem the worse for seeing the truth of it proved more ways 
than one. 

It is certain that the fewer desires a man has, and the less he 
covets, the more easy he is to himself; the more active he is to 
supply his own wants and the less he requires to be waited upon, 



178 FABLE OF THE BEES 

the more he will be beloved and the less trouble he is in a family; 
the more he loves peace and concord, the more charity he has for 
his neighbour, and the more he shines in real virtue, there is no 
doubt but that in proportion he is acceptable to God and man. 
But let us be just, what benefit can these things be of, or what 
earthly good can they do to promote the wealth, the glory, and 
worldly greatness of nations? It is the sensual courtier that sets 
no limits to his luxury; the fickle strumpet that invents new fash- 
ions every week; the haughty duchess that in equipage, entertain- 
ments, and all her behaviour would imitate a princess; the profuse 
rake and lavish heir that scatter about their money without wit 
or judgment, buy everything they see, and either destroy or give 
it away the next day; the covetous and perjured villain that 
squeezed an immense treasure from the tears of widows and 
orphans and left the prodigals the money to spend: it is these 
that are the prey and proper food of a full-grown Leviathan; or, 
in other words, such is the calamitous condition of human affairs, 
that we stand in need of the plagues and monsters I named to 
have all the variety of labour performed which the skill of men 
is capable of inventing in order to procure an honest livelihood 
to the vast multitudes of working poor, that are required to make a 
large society. And it is folly to imagine that great and wealthy 
nations can subsist and be at once powerful and polite without. 

I protest against Popery as much as ever Luther and Calvin 
did, or Queen Elizabeth herself; but I believe from my heart that 
the Reformation has scarce been more instrumental in rendering 
the kingdoms and states that have embraced it flourishing beyond 
other nations than the silly and capricious invention of hooped 
and quilted petticoats. But if this should be denied me by the 
enemies of priestly power, at least I am sure that, bar the great 
men who have fought for and against that layman's blessing, it 
has, from its beginnings to this day, not employed so many hands, 
honest, industrious labouring hands, as the abominable improve- 
ment on female luxury I named has done in few years. Religion is 
one thing and trade is another. He that gives most trouble to thou- 
sands of his neighbours and invents the most operose manufactures 
is, right or wrong, the greatest friend to the society. 

What a bustle is there to be made in several parts of the world 
before a fine scarlet or crimson cloth can be produced; what 



FABLE OF THE BEES 179 

multiplicity of trades and artificers must be employed! Not only 
such as are obvious, as woolcombers, spinners, the weaver, the 
cloth worker, the scourer, the dyer, the setter, the drawer, and 
the packer; but others that are more remote and might seem 
foreign to it; as the mill-wright, the pewterer, and the chemist, 
which yet are all necessary, as well as a great number of other 
implements belonging to the trades already named. But all these 
things are done at home and may be performed without extraordi- 
nary fatigue or danger; the most frightful prospect is left behind, 
when we reflect on the toil and hazard that are to be under- 
gone abroad, the vast seas we are to go over, the different climates 
we are to endure, and the several nations we must be obliged to 
for their assistance. Spain alone, it is true, might furnish us with 
wool to make the finest cloth; but what skill and pains, what 
experience and ingenuity, are required to dye it of those beau- 
tiful colours! How widely are the drugs and other ingredients 
dispersed through the universe that are to meet hi one kettle! 
Allum, indeed, we have of our own; argol we might have from 
the Rhine, and vitriol from Hungary; all this is in Europe; but 
then for saltpetre in quantity we are forced to go as far as the 
East Indies. Cochineal, unknown to the ancients, is not much 
nearer to us, though in quite a different part of the earth: we buy 
it, it is true, from the Spaniards; but not being their product, they 
are forced to fetch it for us from the remotest corner of the new 
world in the East Indies. While so many sailors are broiling in 
the sun and sweltered with heat in the east and west of us, another 
set of them are freezing in the north to fetch potashes from Russia. 
When we are thoroughly acquainted with all the variety of toil 
and labour, the hardships and calamities that must be undergone 
to compass the end I speak of, and we consider the vast risks and 
perils that are run in those voyages, and that few of them are ever 
made but at the expence, not only of the health and welfare, but 
even the lives of many; when we are acquainted with, I say, and 
duly consider the things I named, it is scarce possible to conceive 
a tyrant so inhuman and void of shame that, beholding things in 
the same view, he should exact such terrible services from his 
innocent slaves; and, at the same time, dare to own that he did 
it for no other reason than the satisfaction a man receives from 
having a garment made of scarlet or crimson cloth. But to what 



180 FABLE OF THE BEES 

height of luxury must a nation be arrived where not only the 
king's officers, but likewise the guards, even the private soldiers, 
should have such impudent desires! 

But if we turn the prospect and look on all those labours as 
so many voluntary actions belonging to different callings and 
occupations that men are brought up to for a livelihood, and hi 
which every one works for himself, how much soever he may seem 
to labour for others; if we consider that even the sailors who 
undergo the greatest hardships, as soon as one voyage is ended, 
even after shipwreck are looking out and soliciting for employ- 
ment in another; if we consider, I say, and look on these things 
in another view, we shall find that the labour of the poor is so 
far from being a burden and an imposition upon them, that to 
have employment is a blessing, which in their addresses to Heaven 
they pray for, and to procure it for the generality of them is the 
greatest care of every legislature. 

As children and even infants are the apes of others, so all 
youths have an ardent desire of being men and women, and become 
often ridiculous by their impatient endeavours to appear what 
everybody sees they are not; all large societies are not a little 
indebted to this folly for the perpetuity or at least long continu- 
ance of trades once established. What pains will young people 
take and what violence will they not commit upon themselves to 
attain to insignificant and often blameable qualifications, which, 
for want of judgment and experience, they admire in others that 
are superior to them in age! This fondness of imitation makes them 
accustom themselves by degrees to the use of things that were 
irksome, if not intolerable to them at first, till they know not how 
to leave them and are often very sorry for having inconsiderately 
increased the necessaries of life without any necessity. What es- 
tates have been got by tea and coffee! What a vast traffic is drove, 
what a variety of labour is performed in the world to the mainte- 
nance of thousands of families that altogether depend on two silly if 
not odious customs, the taking of snuff and smoking of tobacco; 
both which, it is certain, do infinitely more hurt than good to those 
that are addicted to them! I shall go further and demonstrate the 
usefulness of private losses and misfortunes to the public, and the 
folly of our wishes when we pretend to be most wise and serious. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 181 

The fire of London was a great calamity; but if the carpenters, 
bricklayers, smiths, and all, not only that are employed in building 
but likewise those that made and dealt in the same manufactures 
and other merchandises that were burnt, and other trades again 
that got by them when they were in full employ, were to vote 
against those who lost by the fire, the rejoicings would equal if not 
exceed the complaints. In recruiting what is lost and destroyed by 
fire, storms, sea-fights, sieges, battles, a considerable part of trade 
consists; the truth of which and whatever I have said of the nature 
of society will plainly appear from what follows. 

It would be a difficult task to enumerate all the advantages and 
different benefits that accrue to a nation on account of shipping 
and navigation; but if we only take into consideration the ships 
themselves and every vessel great and small that is made use of 
for water-carriage, from the least wherry to a first-rate man of 
war; the timber and hands that are employed in the building of 
them; and consider the pitch, tar, rosin, grease; the masts, yards, 
sails and riggings; the variety of smith's work; the cables, oars, 
and everything else belonging to them; we shall find that to fur- 
nish only such a nation as ours with all these necessaries makes up a 
considerable part of the traffic of Europe, without speaking of 
the stores and ammunition of all sorts that are consumed in them, 
or the mariners, watermen and others, with their families, that are 
maintained by them. 

But should we, on the other hand, take a view of the manifold 
mischiefs and variety of evils, moral as well as natural, that befall 
nations on the score of seafaring and their commerce with strangers, 
the prospect would be very frightful; and could we suppose a large 
populous island that should be wholly unacquainted with ships and 
sea affairs, but otherwise a wise and well-governed people; and that 
some angel or their genius should lay before them a scheme or 
draught, where they might see, on the one side, all the riches and 
real advantages that would be acquired by navigation in a thousand 
years; and on the other, the wealth and lives that would be lost, 
and all the other calamities that would be unavoidably sustained 
on account of it during the same time, I am confident they would 
look upon ships with horror and detestation, and that their prudent 
rulers would severely forbid the making and inventing all buildings 



182 FABLE OF THE BEES 

or machines to go to sea with, of what shape or denomination so- 
ever, and prohibit all such abominable contrivances on great penal- 
ties, if not the pain of death. 

But to let alone the necessary consequence of foreign trade, 
the corruption of manners, as well as plagues, poxes, and other 
diseases, that are brought to us by shipping, should we only cast 
our eyes on what is either to be imputed to the wind and weather, 
the treachery of the seas, the ice of the north, the vermin of the 
south, the darkness of nights, and unwholesomeness of climates, 
or else occasioned by the want of good provisions, and the faults 
of mariners, the unskilfulness of some, and the neglect and drunk- 
enness of others; and should we consider the losses of men and 
treasure swallowed up in the deep, the tears and necessities of 
widows and orphans made by the sea, the ruin of merchants and 
the consequences, the continual anxieties that parents and wives 
are in for the safety of their children and husbands, and not for- 
get the many pangs and heart-aches that are felt throughout a 
trading nation by owners and insurers at every blast of wind; 
should we cast our eyes, I say, on these things, consider with due 
attention and give them the weight they deserve, would it not be 
amazing how a nation of thinking people should talk of their ships 
and navigation as a peculiar blessing to them, and placing an 
uncommon felicity in having an infinity of vessels dispersed through 
the wide world, and always some going to and others coming from 
every part of the universe? 

But let us once in our consideration on these things confine 
ourselves to what the ships suffer only, the vessels themselves 
with their rigging and appurtenances, without thinking on the 
freight they carry or the hands that work them, and we shall find 
that the damage sustained that way only is very considerable and 
must one year with another amount to vast sums; the ships that 
are foundered at sea, split against rocks and swallowed up by 
sands, some by the fierceness of tempests altogether, others by 
that and the want of the pilots' experience and knowledge of the 
coasts; the masts that are blown down or forced to be cut and 
thrown overboard, the yards, sails, and cordage of different sizes 
that are destroyed by storms, and the anchors that are lost; add 
to these the necessary repairs of leaks sprung and other hurts 
received from the rage of winds and the violence of the waves; 



FABLE OF THE BEES 183 

many ships are set on fire by carelessness, and the effects of strong 
liquors, which none are more addicted to than sailors; sometimes 
unhealthy climates, at others the badness of provision breed fatal 
distempers that sweep away the greatest part of the crew, and 
not a few ships are lost for want of hands. 

These are all calamities inseparable from navigation and seem 
to be great impediments that clog the wheels of foreign commerce. 
How happy would a merchant think himself if his ship should 
always have fine weather, and the wind he wished for and every 
mariner he employed, from the highest to the lowest, be a know- 
ing, experienced sailor and a careful, sober, good man! Was such 
a felicity to be had for prayers, what owner of ships is there or 
dealer in Europe, nay, the whole world, who would not be all 
day long teasing Heaven to obtain such a blessing for himself, 
without regard to what detriment it would do to others? Such a 
petition would certainly be a very unconscionable one; yet where 
is the man who imagines not that he has a right to make it? And 
therefore, as every one pretends to an equal claim to those favours, 
let us, without reflecting on the impossibility of its being true, sup- 
pose all their prayers effectual and their wishes answered and 
afterwards examine into the result of such a happiness. 

Ships would last as long as timber houses to the full because 
they are as strongly built, and the latter are liable to suffer by high 
winds and other storms, which the first, by our supposition, are 
not to be; so that before there would be any real occasion for new 
ships, the master builders now in being, and everybody under 
them that is set to work about them, would all die a natural death 
if they were not starved or come to some untimely end; for, in 
the first place, all ships having prosperous gales and never waiting 
for the wind, they would make very quick voyages both out and 
home; secondly, no merchandises would be damaged by the sea 
or by stress of weather thrown overboard, but the entire lading 
would always come safe ashore; and hence it would follow that 
three parts in four of the merchantmen already made would be 
superfluous for the present and the stock of ships that are now hi 
the world serve a vast many years. Masts and yards would last 
as long as the vessels themselves, and we should not need to 
trouble Norway on that score a great while yet. The sails and rig- 
ging, indeed, of the few ships made use of would wear out, but 



184 FABLE OF THE BEES 

not a quarter part so fast as now they do, for they often suffer 
more in one hour's storm than in ten days' fair weather. 

Anchors and cables there would be seldom any occasion for, 
and one of each would last a ship time out of mind; this article 
alone would yield many a tedious holiday to the anchor-smiths 
and the rope-yards. This general want of consumption would have 
such an influence on the timber-merchants and all that import 
iron, sail-cloth, hemp, pitch, tar, &c. that four parts in five of 
what, in the beginning of this reflection on sea-affairs I said made 
a considerable branch of the traffic of Europe, would be entirely 
lost. 

I have only touched hitherto on the consequences of this bless- 
ing in relation to shipping, but it would be detrimental to all other 
branches of trade besides and destructive to the poor of every 
country that exports anything of their own growth or manufac- 
ture. The goods and merchandises that every year go to the deep, 
that are spoiled at sea by salt water, by heat, by vermin, destroyed 
by fire, or lost to the merchant by other accidents, all owing to 
storms or tedious voyages or else the neglect or rapacity of 
sailors; such goods, I say, and merchandises are a considerable 
part of what every year is sent abroad throughout the world and 
must have employed great multitudes of poor, before they could 
come on board. A hundred bales of cloth that are burnt or sunk 
in the Mediterranean are as beneficial to the poor in England as 
if they had safely arrived at Smyrna or Aleppo and every yard of 
them had been retailed in the grand Signer's dominions. 

The merchant may break, and by him the clothier, the dyer, 
the packer, and other tradesmen, the middling people, may suffer; 
but the poor that were set to work about them can never lose. 
Day-labourers commonly receive their earnings once a week, and 
all the various working people that were employed, either in any 
of the various branches of the manufacture itself or the several 
land and water carriages it requires to be brought to perfection, 
from the sheep's back, to the vessel it was entered in, were paid, 
at least much the greatest part of them, before the parcel came 
on board. Should any of my readers draw conclusions in infinitum 
from my assertions that goods sunk or burnt are as beneficial to 
the poor as if they had been well sold and put to their proper uses, 
I would count him a caviller and not worth answering: should it 



FABLE OF THE BEES 185 

always rain and the sun never shine, the fruits of the earth would 
soon be rotten and destroyed; and yet it is no paradox to affirm 
that to have grass or corn, rain is as necessary as the sunshine. 

In what manner this blessing of fair winds and fine weather 
would affect the mariners themselves and the breed of sailors may 
be easily conjectured from what has been said already. As there 
would hardly one ship in four be made use of, so the vessels them- 
selves being always exempt from storms, fewer hands would be 
required to work them, and consequently five in six of the seamen 
we have might be spared, which in this nation, most employments 
of the poor being overstocked, would be but an untoward article. 
As soon as those superfluous seamen should be extinct, it would 
be impossible to man such large fleets as we could at present; but 
I do not look upon this as a detriment, or the least inconveniency; 
for the reduction of mariners, as to numbers being general through- 
out the world, all the consequence would be that in case of war 
the maritime powers would be obliged to fight with fewer ships, 
which would be an happiness instead of an evil; and would you 
carry this felicity to the highest pitch of perfection, it is but to 
add one desirable blessing more, and no nation shall ever fight at 
all: the blessing I hint at is- what all good Christians are bound 
to pray for, viz. that all princes and states would be true to their 
oaths and promises and just to one another, as well as their own 
subjects; that they might have a greater regard for the dictates 
of conscience and religion than those of state politics and worldly 
wisdom, and prefer the spiritual welfare of others to their own 
carnal desires, and the honesty, the safety, the peace and tran- 
quility of the nations they govern to their own love of glory, 
spirit of revenge, avarice, and ambition. 

The last paragraph will to many seem a digression that makes 
little for my purpose; but what I mean by it is to demonstrate 
that goodness, integrity, and a peaceful disposition in rulers and 
governors of nations are not the proper qualifications to aggrandize 
them and increase their numbers, any more than the uninterrupted 
series of success[es] that every private person would be blest with, 
if he could, and which I have shown would be injurious and 
destructive to a large society that should place a felicity in worldly 
greatness, and being envied by their neighbours, and value them- 
selves upon their honour and their strength. 



186 FABLE OF THE BEES 

No man needs to guard himself against blessings, but calamities 
require hands to avert them. The amiable qualities of man put 
none of the species upon stirring: his honesty, his love of com- 
pany, his goodness, content and frugality, are so many comforts 
to an indolent society, and the more real and unaffected they are, 
the more they keep everything at rest and peace, and the more 
they will everywhere prevent trouble and motion itself. The same 
almost may be said of the gifts and munificence of Heaven and all 
the bounties and benefits of nature: this is certain, that the more 
extensive they are and the greater plenty we have of them, the 
more we save our labour. But the necessities, the vices, and im- 
perfections of man, together with the various inclemencies of the 
air and other elements, contain in them the seeds of all arts, 
industry and labour; it is the extremities of heat and cold, the in- 
constancy and badness of seasons, the violence and uncertainty 
of winds, the vast power and treachery of water, the rage and 
untractableness of fire, and the stubbornness and sterility of the 
earth that rack our invention, how we shall either avoid the mis- 
chiefs they may produce or correct the malignity of them and 
turn their several forces to our own advantage a thousand dif- 
ferent ways; while we are employed in supplying the infinite 
variety of our wants, which will ever be multiplied as our knowl- 
edge is enlarged and our desires increase. Hunger, thirst, and 
nakedness are the first tyrants that force us to stir; afterwards, 
our pride, sloth, sensuality, and fickleness are the great patrons 
that promote all arts and sciences, trades, handicrafts and callings; 
while the great taskmasters, necessity, avarice, envy, and ambi- 
tion, each in the class that belongs to him, keep the members of 
the society to their labour, and make them all submit, most of 
them cheerfully, to the drudgery of their station, kings and princes 
not excepted. 

The greater the variety of trades and manufactures, the more 
operose they are, and the more they are divided in many branches, 
the greater numbers may be contained in a society without being 
in one another's way, and the more easily they may be rendered 
a rich, potent, and flourishing people. Few virtues employ any 
hands, and therefore they may render a small nation good, but 
they can never make a great one. To be strong and laborious, 
patient in difficulties, and assiduous in all business are commend- 



FABLE OF THE BEES 187 

able qualities; but as they do their own work, so they are their 
own reward, and neither art not industry have ever paid their 
compliments to them; whereas the excellency of human thought 
and contrivance has been and is yet nowhere more conspicuous 
than in the variety of tools and instruments of workmen and 
artificers and the multiplicity of engines, that were all invented 
either to assist the weakness of man, to correct his many imper- 
fections, to gratify his laziness, or obviate his impatience. 

It is in morality as it is in nature, there is nothing so perfectly 
good in creatures that it cannot be hurtful to anyone of the society, 
nor anything so entirely evil, but it may prove beneficial to some 
part or other of the creation; so that things are only good and 
evil in reference to so something else and according to the light 
and position they are placed in. What pleases us is good in that 
regard, and by this rule every man wishes well for himself to the 
best of his capacity with little respect to his neighbour. There 
never was any rain yet, though in a very dry season when public 
prayers had been made for it, but somebody or other who wanted 
to go abroad wished it might be fair weather only for that day. 
When the corn stands thick in the spring and the generality of 
the country rejoice at the pleasing object, the rich farmer who 
kept his last year's crop for a better market pines at the sight and 
inwardly grieves at the prospect of a plentiful harvest. Nay, we 
shall often hear your idle people openly wish for the possessions 
of others, and not to be injurious forsooth add this wise proviso, 
that it should be without detriment to the owners; but I am afraid 
they often do it without any such restriction in their hearts. 

It is happiness that the prayers as well as wishes of most people 
are insignificant and good for nothing; or else the only thing 
that could keep mankind fit for society and the world from falling 
into confusion would be the impossibility that all the petitions 
made to Heaven should be granted. A dutiful pretty young gen- 
tleman newly come from his travels lies at the Briel waiting with 
impatience for an easterly wind to waft him over to England, 
where a dying father, who wants to embrace and give him his 
blessing before he yields his breath, lies hoaning* after him, melted 
with grief and tenderness; in the meanwhile a British minister, who 



*to hone to grumble, murmur, whine, moan. 



188 FABLE OF THE BEES 

is to take care of the Protestant interest in Germany, is riding post 
to Harwich and in violent haste to be at Ratisbone before the 
diet* breaks up. At the same time a rich fleet lies ready for the 
Mediterranean and a fine squadron is bound for the Baltic. All 
these things may probably happen at once, at least there is no 
difficulty in supposing they should. If these people are not atheists 
or very great reprobates, they will all have some good thoughts 
before they go to sleep, and consequently about bed-time, they 
must all differently pray for a fair wind and a prosperous voyage. 
I do not say but it is their duty, and it is possible they may be all 
heard, but I am sure they cannot be all served at the same time. 

After this, I flatter myself to have demonstrated that neither 
the friendly qualities and kind affections that are natural to man 
nor the real virtues he is capable of acquiring by reason and 
self-denial are the foundation of society; but that what we call 
evil in this world, moral as well as natural, is the grand principle 
that makes us sociable creatures, the solid basis, the life and 
support of all trades and employments without exception; that 
there we must look for the true origin of all arts and sciences, and 
that the moment evil ceases, the society must be spoiled, if not 
totally dissolved. 

I could add a thousand things to enforce and further illustrate 
this truth with abundance of pleasure; but for fear of being trou- 
blesome, I shall make an end, though I confess that I have not 
been half so solicitous to gain the approbation of others, as I 
have studied to please myself in this amusement; yet if ever I hear 
that by following this diversion I have given any to the intelligent 
reader, it will always add to the satisfaction I have received in 
the performance. In the hope my vanity forms of this, I leave him 
with regret and conclude with repeating the seeming paradox, the 
substance of which is advanced in the title page, that private vices, 
by the dexterous management of a skilful politician, may be turned 
into public benefits. 



*At this period, the imperial diet of the Holy Roman Empire met 
regularly at Regensburg (Ratisbon) in Bavaria. 



[1728] 

THE FABLE OF THE BEES 

PART II 

Opinionum enim Commenta delet dies; Naturae judicia confirmat. 

[Time destroys frivolous superstitions but confirms solid judgments 

(freely translated).] Cicero de Nat. Deor. Lib. 2 



FROM THE FOURTH 

DIALOGUE 

BETWEEN 
HORATIO AND CLEOMENES 

[Cleomenes defends The Fable of the Bees and acts as spokesman 

for Mandeville.] 

CLEOMENES 

... IT IS EVIDENT that the necessaries of life stand not 
everywhere ready dished up before all creatures; therefore 
they have instincts that prompt them to look out for those 
necessaries and teach them how to come at them. The zeal and 
alacrity to gratify their appetites is always proportioned to the 
strength and the degree of force with which those instincts work 
upon every creature. But, considering the disposition of things 

189 



190 FABLE OF THE BEES 

upon earth and the multiplicity of animals that have all their 
own wants to supply, it must be obvious that these attempts of 
creatures to obey the different calls of nature will be often opposed 
and frustrated, and that in many animals they would seldom meet 
with success if every individual was not endued with a passion 
that, summoning all his strength, inspired him with a transporting 
eagerness to overcome the obstacles that hinder him in his great 
work of self-preservation. The passion I describe is called anger. 
How a creature possessed of this passion and self-liking, when 
he sees others enjoy what he wants, should be affected with envy 
can likewise be no mystery. After labour the most savage and the 
most industrious creature seeks rest. Hence we learn that all of 
them are furnished, more or less, with of a love of ease. Exerting 
their strength tires them; and the loss of spirits, experience teaches 
us, is best repaired by food and sleep. We see that creatures who 
in their way of living must meet with the greatest opposition have 
the greatest share of anger and are born with offensive arms. If 
this anger was to employ a creature always, without consideration 
of the danger he exposed himself to, he would soon be destroyed. 
For this reason they are all endued with fear; and the lion him- 
self turns tail if the hunters are armed and too numerous. From 
what we observe in the behaviour of brutes we have reason to 
think that among the more perfect animals those of the same 
species have a capacity, on many occasions, to make their wants 
known to one another; and we are sure of several, not only that 
they understand one another, but likewise that they may be made 
to understand us. In comparing our species with that of other 
animals, when we consider the make of man and the qualifications 
that are obvious in him, his superior capacity in the faculties of 
thinking and reflecting beyond other creatures, his being capable 
of learning to speak, and the usefulness of his hands and fingers, 
there is no room to doubt that he is more fit for society than any 
other animal we know. 

Hor. Since you wholly reject my Lord Shaftesbury's system, 
I wish you would give me your opinion at large concerning society 
and the sociableness of man; and I will hearken to you with great 
attention. 

Cleo. The cause of sociableness in man, that is, his fitness for 
society, is no such abstruse matter. A person of middling capacity 



FABLE OF THE BEES 191 

that has some experience and a tolerable knowledge of human 
nature may soon find it out, if his desire of knowing the truth 
be sincere and he will look for it without prepossession; but most 
people that have treated on this subject had a turn to serve and a 
cause in view which they were resolved to maintain. It is very 
unworthy of a philosopher to say, as Hobbes did, that man is born 
unfit for society, and allege no better reason for it than the in- 
capacity that infants come into the world with; but some of his 
adversaries have as far overshot the mark when they asserted that 
everything which man can attain to ought to be esteemed as a 
cause of his fitness for society. 

Hor. But is there in the mind of man a natural affection that 
prompts him -to love his species beyond what other animals have 
for theirs; or are we born with hatred and aversion that makes 
us wolves and bears to one another? 

Cleo. I believe neither. From what appears to us in human 
affairs and the works of nature, we have more reason to imagine 
that the desire as well as aptness of man to associate do not 
proceed from his love to others, than we have to believe that a 
mutual affection of the planets to one another, superior to what 
they feel to stars more remote, is not the true cause why they 
keep always moving together in the same solar system. 

Hor. You do not believe that the stars have any love for one 
another, I am sure. Then why more reason? 

Cleo. Because there are no phenomena plainly to contradict this 
love of the planets; and we meet with thousands every day to 
convince us that man centres everything in himself and neither 
loves nor hates but for his own sake. Every individual is a little 
world by itself, and all creatures, as far as their understanding and 
abilities will let them, endeavour to make that self happy. This 
in all of them is the continual labour and seems to be the whole 
design of life. Hence it follows that in the choice of things men 
must be determined by the perception they have of happiness; and 
no person can commit or set about an action which at that then 
present time seems not to be the best to him. 

Hor. What will you then say to video meliora proboque, deteriora 
sequor?* 



*Ovid, Metamorphoses, VII, 20-21. I see the better and approve 
it, but I follow the worse. 



192 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Cleo. That only shows the turpitude of our inclinations. But 
men may say what they please. Every motion in a free agent 
which he does not approve of is either convulsive or it is not his; 
I speak of those that are subject to the will. When two things are 
left to a person's choice, it is a demonstration that he thinks that 
most eligible which he chooses, how contradictory, impertinent, or 
pernicious soever his reason for choosing it may be. Without this, 
there could be no voluntary suicide; and it would be injustice to 
punish men for their crimes. 

Hor. I believe everybody endeavours to be pleased; but it is 
inconceivable that creatures of the same species should differ so 
much from one another, as men do in their notions of pleasure; 
and that some of them should take delight in what is the greatest 
aversion to others. All aim at happiness; but the question is, 
where is it to be found? 

Cleo. It is with complete felicity in this world as it is with the 
philosopher's stone: both have been sought after many different 
ways by wise men as well as fools, though neither of them has 
been obtained hitherto. But in searching after either, diligent 
inquirers have often stumbled by chance on useful discoveries of 
things they did not look for and which human sagacity, labouring 
with design a priori, never would have detected. Multitudes of 
our species may in any habitable part of the globe assist one 
another in a common defence and be raised into a politic body, 
in which men shall live comfortably together for many centuries, 
without being acquainted with a thousand things that if known 
would every one of them be instrumental to render the happiness 
of the public more complete, according to the common notions 
men have of happiness. In one part of the world we have found 
great and flourishing nations that knew nothing of ships; and in 
others traffic by sea had been in use above two thousand years, 
and navigation had received innumerable improvements before 
they knew how to sail by the help of the lodestone. It would be 
ridiculous to allege this piece of knowledge either as a reason why 
man first chose to go to sea or as an argument to prove his natural 
capacity for maritime affairs. To raise a garden it is necessary 
that we should have a soil and a climate fit for that purpose. When 
we have these, we want nothing, besides patience, but the seeds 
of vegetables and proper culture. Fine walks and canals, statues, 



FABLE OF THE BEES 193 

summer-houses, fountains, and cascades are great improvements 
on the delights of nature; but they are not essential to the exist- 
ence of a garden. All nations must have had mean beginnings; and 
it is in those, the infancy of them, that the sociableness of man is 
as conspicuous as it can be ever after. Man is called a sociable 
creature chiefly for two reasons: first, because it is commonly 
imagined that he is naturally more fond and desirous of society 
than any other creature; secondly, because it is manifest that asso- 
ciating in men turns to better account than it possibly could do in 
other animals if they were to attempt it. 

Hor. But why do you say of the first that it is commonly 
imagined; is it not true, then? 

Cleo. I have a very good reason for this caution. All men born 
in society are certainly more desirous of it than any other animal; 
but whether man be naturally so, that is a question. But, if he was, 
it is no excellency, nothing to brag of. The love man has for 
his ease and security and his perpetual desire of meliorating his 
condition must be sufficient motives to make him fond of society, 
concerning the necessitous and helpless condition of his nature. 

Hor. Do not you fall into the same error which, you say, Hobbes 
has been guilty of, when you talk of man's necessitous and help- 
less condition? 

Cleo. Not at all; I speak of men and women full grown; and 
the more extensive their knowledge is, the higher their quality, 
and the greater their possessions are, the more necessitous and 
helpless they are in their nature. A nobleman of twenty-five or 
thirty thousand pounds a year that has three or four coaches and 
six and above fifty people to serve him is, in his person considered 
singly, abstract from what he possesses, more necessitous than an 
obscure man that has but fifty pounds a year and is used to walk 
a-foot; so, a lady who never stuck a pin in herself and is dressed 
and undressed from head to foot like a jointed baby by her woman 
and the assistance of another maid or two is a more helpless 
creature than Doll the dairy-maid who all the winter long dresses 
herself in the dark in less time than the other bestows hi placing 
of her patches. 

Hor. But is the desire of meliorating our condition which you 
named so general that no man is without it? 

Cleo. Not one that can be called a sociable creature, and I 



194 FABLE OF THE BEES 

believe this to be as much a characteristic of our species as any 
can be named; for there is not a man in the world, educated in 
society, who if he could compass it by wishing would not have 
something added to, taken from, or altered in his person, posses- 
sions, circumstances, or any part of the society he belongs to. 
This is what is not to be perceived in any creature but man, whose 
great industry in supplying what he calls his wants could never have 
been known so well as it is if it had not been for the unreason- 
ableness as well as multiplicity of his desires. From all which it 
is manifest that the most civilized people stand most in need of 
society, and consequently, none less than savages. The second 
reason for which I said man was called sociable is that associating 
together turned to better account in our species than it would do 
in any other if they were to try it. To find out the reason of this 
we must search into human nature for such qualifications as we 
excel all other animals in and which the generality of men are 
endued with, taught or untaught. But in doing this, we should 
neglect nothing that is observable in them from their most early 
youth to their extreme old age. 

Hor. I cannot see why you use this precaution of taking the 
whole age^of man; would it not be sufficient to mind those quali- 
fications which he is possessed of when he is come to the height 
of maturity or his greatest perfection? 

Cleo. A considerable part of what is called docility in creatures 
depends upon the pliableness of the parts and their fitness to be 
moved with facility, which are either entirely lost or very much 
impaired when they are full grown. There is nothing in which our 
species so far surpasses all others than in the capacity of acquiring 
the faculty of thinking and speaking well; that this is a peculiar 
property belonging to our nature is very certain, yet it is as mani- 
fest that this capacity vanishes when we come to maturity, if till 
then it has been neglected. The term of life likewise that is com- 
monly enjoyed by our species, being longer than it is in most other 
animals, we have a prerogative above them in point of time; and 
man has a greater opportunity of advancing in wisdom, though 
not to be acquired but by his own experience, than a creature that 
lives but half his age, though it had the same capacity. A man of 
threescore, ceteris paribus, knows better what is to be embraced 
or avoided in life than a man of thirty. What Mitio, in excusing 



FABLE OF THE BEES 195 

the follies of youth, said to his brother Demea in the Adelphi, ad 
omnia alia cetate sapimus rectius* holds among savages as well 
as among philosophers. It is the concurrence of these with other 
properties that together compose the sociableness of man. 

Hor. But why may not the love of our species be named as one 
of these properties? 

Cleo. First, because as I have said already, it does not appear 
that we have it beyond other animals; secondly, because it is out 
of the question: for if we examine into the nature of all bodies 
politic, we shall find that no dependence is ever had or stress 
laid on any such affection, either for the raising or maintaining of 
them. 

Hor. But the epithet itself, the signification of the word, imports 
this love to one another, as is manifest from the contrary. One 
who loves solitude is averse to company, or of a singular, reserved, 
and sullen temper, is the very reverse of a sociable man. 

Cleo. When we compare some men to others, the word, I own, 
is often used in that sense; but when we speak of a quality peculiar 
to our species and say that man is a sociable creature, the word 
implies no more than that in our nature we have a certain fitness, 
by which great multitudes of us co-operating, may be united and 
formed into one body; that endued with and able to make use of 
the strength, skill and prudence of every individual shall govern 
itself and act on all emergencies as if it was animated by one soul 
and actuated by one will. I am willing to allow that among the 
motives that prompt man to enter into society, there is a desire 
which he has naturally after company; but he has it for his own 
sake, in hopes of being the better for it; and he would never 
wish for either company or anything else, but for some advantage 
or other he proposes to himself from it. What I deny is that man 
naturally has such a desire out of a fondness of his species, superior 
to what other animals have for theirs. It is a compliment which 
we commonly pay to ourselves, but there is no more reality in 
it than in our being one another's humble servants; and I insist 
upon it that this pretended love of our species and natural affec- 
tion we are said to have for one another beyond other animals 



Terence, Adelphoe, 1. 832: ... in all other respects we become 
wiser as we grow older (i.e., only in money matters do we remain the 
same: we .think too much of it). 



196 FABLE OF THE BEES 

is neither instrumental to the erecting of societies, nor ever trusted 
to in our prudent commerce with one another when associated, 
any more than if it had no existence. The undoubted basis of all 
societies is government; this truth, well examined into, will fur- 
nish us with all the reasons of man's excellency as to sociableness. 
It is evident from it that creatures to be raised into a community 
must in the first place be governable. This is a qualification that 
requires fear and some degree of understanding; for a creature 
not susceptible of fear is never to be governed; and the more sense 
and courage it has, the more refractory and untractable it will be 
without the influence of that useful passion; and again, fear with- 
out understanding puts creatures only upon avoiding the danger 
dreaded without considering what will become of themselves after- 
wards; so wild birds will beat out their brains against the cage 
before they will save their lives by eating. There is a great dif- 
ference between being submissive and being governable; for he 
who barely submits to another only embraces what he dislikes to 
shun what he dislikes more; and we may be very submissive and 
be of no use to the person we submit to; but to be governable 
implies an endeavour to please and a willingness to exert ourselves 
in behalf of the person that governs; but love beginning every- 
where at home, no creature can labour for others and be easy long, 
whilst self is wholly out of the question; therefore a creature is 
then truly governable when, reconciled to submission, it has learned 
to construe his servitude to his own advantage; and rests satisfied 
with the account it finds for itself in the labour it performs for 
others. Several kinds of animals are or may with little trouble be 
made thus governable; but there is not one creature so tame that 
it can be made to serve its own species but man; yet without this 
he could never have been made sociable. 

Hor. But was not man by nature designed for society? 

Cleo. We know from revelation that man was made for society. 

Hor. But if it had not been revealed, or you had been a Chinese 
or a Mexican, what would you answer me as a philosopher? 

Cleo. That nature had designed man for society as she has made 
grapes for wine. 

Hor. To make wine is an invention of man, as it is to press oil 
from olives and other vegetables and to make ropes of hemp. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 197 

Cleo. And so it is to form a society of independent multitudes; 
and there is nothing that requires greater skill. 

Hor. But is not the sociableness of man the work of nature or 
rather of the author of nature, Divine Providence? 

Cleo. Without doubt; but so is the innate virtue and peculiar 
aptitude of everything; that grapes are fit to make wine, and 
barley and water to make other liquors is the work of Providence; 
but it is human sagacity that finds out the uses we make of them; 
all the other capacities of man likewise, as well as his sociableness, 
are evidently derived from God who made him; everything there- 
fore that our industry can produce or compass is originally owing 
to the Author of our being. But when we speak of the works of 
nature to distinguish them from those of art, we mean such as 
were brought forth without our concurrence. So nature in due 
season produces peas; but in England you cannot have them green 
in January without art and uncommon industry. What nature de- 
signs, she executes herself; there are creatures of whom it is visi- 
ble that nature has designed them for society, as is most obvious 
in bees, to whom she has given instincts for that purpose, as 
appears from the effects. We owe our being and everything else 
to the great Author of the universe; but as societies cannot sub- 
sist without his preserving power, so they cannot exist without 
the concurrence of human wisdom; all of them must have a de- 
pendance either on mutual compact or the force of the strong 
exerting itself upon the patience of the weak. The difference be- 
tween the works of art and those of nature is so immense that 
it is impossible not to know them asunder. Knowing, a priori, 
belongs to God only, and Divine Wisdom acts with an original 
certainty, of which what we call demonstration is but an imperfect 
borrowed copy. Amongst the works of nature, therefore, we see 
no trials nor essays; they are all complete and such as she would 
have them at the first production, and, where she has not been 
interrupted, highly finished beyond the reach of our understanding 
as well as senses. Wretched man on the contrary is sure of nothing, 
his own existence not excepted, but from a reasoning a posteriori. 
The consequence of this is that the works of art and human inven- 
tion are all very lame and defective, and most of them pitifully 
mean at first; our knowledge is advanced by slow degrees, and 



198 FABLE OF THE BEES 

some arts and sciences require the experience of many ages be- 
fore they can be brought to any tolerable perfection. Have we any 
reason to imagine that the society of bees that sent forth the first 
swarm made worse wax or honey than any of their posterity have 
produced since? And again the laws of nature are fixed and un- 
alterable; in all her orders and regulations there is a stability 
nowhere to be met with in things of human contrivance and ap- 
probation; Quid placet aut odio est, quod non mutabile credos?* 
Is it probable that amongst the bees there has ever been any 
other form of government than what every swarm submits to 
now? What an infinite variety of speculations, what ridiculous 
schemes have not been proposed amongst men on the subject of 
government; what dissensions in opinion and what fatal quarrels 
has it not been the occasion of! and which is the best form of it, 
is a question to this day undecided. The projects, good and bad, 
that have been stated for the benefit and more happy establish- 
ment of society are innumerable; but how shortsighted is our 
sagacity, how fallible human judgment! What has seemed highly 
advantageous to mankind in one age has often been found to be 
evidently detrimental by the succeeding; and even among con- 
temporaries, what is revered in one country is the abomination of 
another. What changes have ever bees made in their furniture or 
architecture? Have they ever made cells that were not sexangular 
or added any tools to those which nature furnished them with at 
the beginning? What mighty structures have been raised, what 
prodigious works have been performed by the great nations of the 
world! Toward all these nature has only found materials; the 
quarry yields marble, but it is the sculptor that makes a statue 
of it. To have the infinite variety of iron tools that have been 
invented, nature has given us nothing but the ore, which she has 
hid in the bowels of the earth. 

Hor. But the capacity of the workmen, the inventors of arts 
and those that unproved them, has had a great share in bringing 
those labours to perfection; and their genius they had from nature. 

Cleo. So far as it depended upon the make of their frame, the 
accuracy of the machine they had, and no further; but this I have 



"Horace, Epistles, II, i, 101: Do you think that there are any tastes 
that do not change? [free translation]. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 199 

allowed already; and if you remember what I have said on this 
head, you will find that the part which nature contributed toward 
the skill and patience of every single person that had a hand hi 
those works was very inconsiderable. 

Hor. If I have not misunderstood you, you would insinuate 
two things: first, that the fitness of man for society beyond other 
animals is something real, but that it is hardly perceptible in indi- 
viduals before great numbers of them are joined together and 
artfully managed; secondly, that this real something, this sociable- 
ness, is a compound that consists in a concurrence of several things 
and not in any one palpable quality that man is endued with and 
brutes are destitute of. 

Cleo. You are perfectly right; every grape contains a small 
quantity of juice, and when great heaps of them are squeezed 
together, they yield a liquor which by skilful management may be 
made into wine; but if we consider how necessary fermentation 
is to the vinosity of the liquor, I mean, how essential is it to its 
being wine, it will be evident to us that without great impropriety 
of speech it cannot be said that in every grape there is wine. 

Hor. Vinosity, so far as it is the effect of fermentation, is ad- 
ventitious and what none of the grapes could ever have received 
whilst they remained single; and, therefore, if you would compare 
the sociableness of man to the vinosity of wine, you must show 
me that in society there is an equivalent for fermentation; I mean 
something that individual persons are not actually possessed of 
whilst they remain single and which likewise is palpably adventi- 
tious to multitudes when joined together; in the same manner as 
fermentation is to the juice of grapes and as necessary and essen- 
tial to the completing of society as that is, that same fermentation, 
to procure the vinosity of wine. 

Cleo. Such an equivalent is demonstrable in mutual commerce; 
for if we examine every faculty and qualification from and for 
which we judge and pronounce man to be a sociable creature 
beyond other animals, we shall find that a very considerable if not 
the greatest part of the attribute is acquired and comes upon 
multitudes from their conversing with one another. Fabricando 
fabri fimus.* Men become sociable by living together hi society. 



*We become makers by making. 



200 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Natural affection prompts all mothers to take care of the offspring 
they dare own, so far as to feed and keep them from harm whilst 
they are helpless; but where people are poor and the women have 
no leisure to indulge themselves in the various expressions of their 
fondness for their infants, which fondling of them ever increases, 
they are often very remiss in tending and playing with them; and 
the more healthy and quiet such children are, the more they are 
neglected. This want of prattling to and stirring up the spirits in 
babes is often the principal cause of an invincible stupidity, as 
well as ignorance, when they are grown up; and we often ascribe 
to natural incapacity what is altogether owing to the neglect of 
this early instruction. We have so few examples of human crea- 
tures that never conversed with their own species that it is hard 
to guess what man would be, entirely untaught; but we have good 
reason to believe that the faculty of thinking would be very im- 
perfect in such a one if we consider that the greatest docility can 
be of no use to a creature whilst it has nothing to imitate nor any 
body to teach it. 

Hor. Philosophers therefore are very wisely employed when they 
discourse about the laws of nature, and pretend to determine 
what a man in the state of nature would think and which way he 
would reason concerning himself and the creation, uninstructed. 

Cleo. Thinking and reasoning justly, as Mr. Locke has rightly 
observed, require time and practice. Those that have not used 
themselves to thinking but just on their present necessities, make 
poor work of it when they try beyond that. In remote parts and 
such as are least inhabited, we shall find our species come nearer 
the state of nature than it does in and near great cities and con- 
siderable towns, even in the most civilized nations. Among the 
most ignorant of such people you may learn the truth of my 
assertion; talk to them about anything that requires abstract think- 
ing, and there is not one in fifty that will understand you any more 
than a horse would; and yet many of them are useful labourers 
and cunning enough to tell lies and deceive. Man is a rational 
creature, but he is not endued with reason when he comes into 
the world; nor can he afterwards put it on when he pleases, at 
once, as he may a garment. Speech likewise is a characteristic of 
our species, but no man is born with it; and a dozen generations 



FABLE OF THE BEES 201 

proceeding from two savages would not produce any tolerable 
language; nor have we reason to believe that a man could be taught 
to speak after five-and-twenty if he had never heard others before 
that time. 

Hor. The necessity of teaching whilst the organs are supple and 
easily yield to impression, which you have spoke of before, I 
believe is of great weight, both in speaking and thinking; but could 
a dog or a monkey ever be taught to speak? 

Cleo. I believe not; but I do not think that creatures of another 
species had ever the pains bestowed upon them that some children 
have before they can pronounce one word. Another thing to be 
considered is that though some animals perhaps live longer than 
we do, there is no species that remains young so long as ours; 
and besides what we owe to the superior aptitude to learn, which 
we have from the great accuracy of our frame and inward struc- 
ture, we are not a little indebted for our docility to the slowness 
and long gradation of our increases before we are full grown: the 
organs in other creatures grow stiff before ours are come to half 
their perfection. 

Hor. So that in the compliment we make to our species of its 
being endued with speech and sociableness, there is no other reality 
than that by care and industry men may be taught to speak and 
be made sociable if the discipline begins when they are very young. 

Cleo. Not otherwise. A thousand of our species all grown up, 
that is, above five-and-twenty, could never be made sociable if 
they had been brought up wild and were all strangers to one an- 
other. 

Hor. I believe they would not be civilized if their education 
began so late. 

Cleo. But I mean barely sociable, as it is the epithet peculiar 
to man; that is, it would be impossible by art to govern them any 
more than so many wild horses unless you had two or three times 
that number to watch and keep them in awe. Therefore it is highly 
probable that most societies and beginnings of nations were formed 
in the manner Sir William Temple supposes it, but nothing near 
so fast; and I wonder how a man of his unquestionable good 
sense could form an idea of justice, prudence, and wisdom in an 
untaught creature; or think of a civilized man before there was 



202 FABLE OF THE BEES 

any civil society and even before men had commenced to associate. 

Hor. I have read it, I am sure, but I do not remember what it 
is you mean. 

Cleo. He is just behind you; the third shelf from the bottom, 
the first volume; pray reach it me, it is worth your hearing. It is 
in his Essay on Government. Here it is. "For if we consider man 
multiplying his kind by the birth of many children, and his cares 
by providing even necessary food for them, until they are able to 
do it for themselves (which happens much later to the generations 
of men, and makes a much longer dependence of children upon 
parents, than we can observe among any other creatures); if we 
consider not only the cares, but the industry he is forced to, for 
the necessary sustenance of his helpless brood, either in gathering 
the natural fruits, or raising those which are purchased with labour 
and toil: if he be forced for supply of this stock, to catch the tamer 
creatures, and hunt the wilder, sometimes to exercise his courage 
in defending his little family, and fighting with the strong and 
savage beasts (that would prey upon him, as he does upon the 
weak and mild) : if we suppose him disposing with discretion and 
order, whatever he gets among his children, according to each of 
their Jiunger or need; sometimes laying up for tomorrow, what 
was more than enough for today; at other times pinching himself, 
rather than suffering any of them should want " 

Hor. This man is no savage or untaught creature; he is fit to 
be a justice of peace. 

Cleo. Pray let me go on, I shall only read this paragraph: "And 
as each of them grows up, and able to share in the common sup- 
port, teaching them, both by lesson and example, what he is now 
to do, as the son of his family, and what hereafter, as the father 
of another; instructing them all what qualities are good, and what 
are ill, for their health and life, or common society (which will 
certainly comprehend whatever is generally esteemed virtue or 
vice among men) cherishing and encouraging dispositions to the 
good, disfavouring and punishing those to the ill: And lastly, 
among the various accidents of life, lifting up his eyes to Heaven, 
when the earth affords him no relief; and having recourse to a 
higher and a greater nature, whenever he finds the frailty of his 
own: we must needs conclude, that the children of this man can- 
not fail of being bred up with a great opinion of his wisdom, his 



FABLE OF THE BEES 203 

goodness, his valour, and his piety, And if they see constant plenty 
in the family, they believe well of his fortune, too." 

Hor. Did this man spring out of the earth, I wonder, or did 
he drop from the sky? 

Cleo. There is no manner of absurdity in supposing . 

Hor. The discussion of this would too far engage us; I am sure 
I have tired you already with my impertinence. 

Cleo. You have pleased me extremely; the questions you have 
asked have all been very pertinent and such as every man of sense 
would make that had not made it his business to think on these 
things. I read that passage on purpose to you to make some use 
of it; but if you are weary of the subject, I will not trespass upon 
your patience any longer. 

Hor. You mistake me; I begin to be fond of the subject; but 
before we talk of it any further, I have a mind to run over that 
Essay again; it is a great while since I read it; and after that I shall 
be glad to resume the discourse; the sooner the better. I know 
you are a lover of fine fruit; if you will dine with me tomorrow, 
I will give you an ananas [pineapple]. 

Cleo. I love your company so well that I can refuse no oppor- 
tunity of enjoying it. 

Hor. Au revoir then. 

Cleo. Your servant. 

* * * * 



FROM THE FIFTH 

DIALOGUE 

BETWEEN 

HORATIO AND CLEOMENES 
[They have just eaten the pineapple]. 

CLEOMENES 



I 



.T EXCELS EVERYTHING; it is extremely rich with- 
out being luscious, and I know nothing to which I can compare the 
taste of it; to me it seems to be a collection of different fine flavours 
that puts me in mind of several delicious fruits which yet are all 
outdone by it. 

Hor. I am glad it pleased you. 

Cleo. The scent of it likewise is wonderfully reviving. As you 
was paring it, a fragrancy, I thought perfumed the room that was 
perfectly cordial. 

Hor. The inside of the rind has an oiliness of no disagreeable 
smell that upon handling of it sticks to one's fingers for a consider- 
able tune; for though now I have washed and wiped my hands, the 
flavour of it will not be entirely gone from them by tomorrow 
morning. 

Cleo. This was the third I ever tasted of our own growth; the 
production of them in these northern climates is no small instance 

205 



206 FABLE OF THE BEES 

of human industry and our improvements in gardening. It is very 
elegant to enjoy the wholesome air of temperate regions and at the 
same time be able to raise fruit to its highest maturity that 
naturally requires the sun of the Torrid Zone. 

Hor. It is easy enough to procure heat, but the great art con- 
sists in finding out and regulating the degrees of it at pleasure; 
without which it would be impossible to ripen an ananas here, and 
to compass this with that exactness as it is done by the help of 
thermometers was certainly a fine invention. 

Cleo. I do not care to drink any more. 

Hor. Just as you please; otherwise I was going to name a health, 
which would not have come mal d propos. 

Cleo. Whose is that, pray? 

Hor. I was thinking on the man to whom we are in a great 
measure obliged for the production and culture of the exotic we 
were speaking of in this kingdom, Sir Matthew Decker; the first 
ananas or pineapple that was brought to perfection in England grew 
in his garden at Richmond. 

Cleo. With all my heart; let us finish with that; he is a benefi- 
cent and, I believe, a very honest man. 

Hor. It would not be easy to name another who with the same 
knowledge of the world and capacity of getting money, is equally 
disinterested and inoffensive. 

Cleo. Have you considered the things we discoursed of yester- 
day? 

Hor. I have thought on nothing else since I saw you. This 
morning I went through the whole Essay and with more attention 
than I did formerly. I like it very well; only that passage which 
you read yesterday and some others to the same purpose I cannot 
reconcile with the account we have of man's origin from the Bible. 
Since all are descendants from Adam and consequently of Noah 
and his posterity, how came savages into the world? 

Cleo. The history of the world, as to very ancient times, is very 
imperfect. What devastations have been made by war, by pesti- 
lence, and by famine; what distress some men have been drove to, 
and how strangely our race has been dispersed and scattered over 
the earth since the flood, we do not know. 

Hor. But persons that are well instructed themselves never fail 



FABLE OF THE BEES 207 

of teaching their children; and we have no reason to think that 
knowing, civilized men, as the sons of Noah were, should have 
neglected their offspring; but it is altogether incredible, as all are 
descendants from them, that succeeding generations instead of 
increasing in experience and wisdom should learn backward and 
still more and more abandon their broods in such a manner as to 
degenerate at last to what you call the state of nature. 

Cleo. Whether you intend this as a sarcasm or not, I do not 
know; but you have raised no difficulty that can render the truth 
of the sacred history suspected. Holy writ has acquainted us with 
the miraculous origin of our species and the small remainder of 
it after the deluge. But it is far from informing us of all the revo- 
lutions that have happened among mankind since. The Old Testa- 
ment hardly touches upon any particulars that had no relation 
to the Jews; neither does Moses pretend to give a full account of 
everything that happened to or was transacted by our first par- 
ents. He names none of Adam's daughters and takes no notice of 
several things that must have happened in the beginning of the 
world, as is evident from Cain's building a city and several other 
circumstances; from which it is plain, that Moses meddled with 
nothing but what was material and to his purpose; which in that 
part of his history was to trace the descent of the Patriarchs from 
the first man. But that there are savages is certain; most nations 
of Europe have met with wild men and women in several parts of 
the world that were ignorant of the use of letters, and among whom 
they could observe no rule or government. 

Hor. That there are savages, I do not question; and from the 
great number of slaves that are yearly fetched from Africa it is 
manifest that in some parts there must be vast swarms of people 
that have not yet made a great hand of their sociableness. But 
how to derive them from all the sons of Noah, I own, is past my 
skill. 

Cleo. You find it as difficult to account for the loss of the many 
fine arts and useful inventions of the ancients, which the world 
has certainly sustained. But the fault I find with Sir William Tem- 
ple is in the character of his savage. Just reasoning and such an 
orderly way of proceeding as he makes him act in are unnatural to 
a wild man. In such a one the passions must be boisterous and 



208 FABLE OF THE BEES 

continually jostling and succeeding one another; no untaught man 
could have a regular way of thinking or pursue any one design with 
steadiness. 

Hor. You have strange notions of our species. But has not a 
man, by the time that he comes to maturity, some notions of right 
and wrong that are natural? 

Cleo. Before I answer your question, I would have you consider 
that among savages there must be always a great difference as iO 
the wildness or lameness of them. All creatures naturally love their 
offspring whilst they are helpless, and so does man. But in the 
savage state men are more liable to accidents and misfortunes 
than they are in society as to the rearing of their young ones; and 
therefore the children of savages must very often be put to their 
shifts so as hardly to remember by the time that they are grown 
up that they had any parents. If this happens too early and they 
are dropt or lost before they are four or five years of age, they 
must perish; either die for want or be devoured by beasts of prey 
unless some other creature takes care of them. Those orphans 
that survive, and become their own masters very young, must, 
when they are come to .maturity, be much wilder than others that 
have lived many years, under the tuition of parents. 

Hof. But would not the wildest man you can imagine have from 
nature some thoughts of justice and injustice? 

Cleo. Such a one, I believe, would naturally, without much 
thinking in the case, take everything to be his own that he could 
lay his hands on. 

Hor. Then they would soon be undeceived if two or three of 
them met together. 

Cleo. That they would soon disagree and quarrel, is highly 
probable; but I do not believe they ever would be undeceived. 

Hor. At this rate men could never be formed into an aggregate 
body. How came society into the world? 

Cleo. As I told you, from private families; but not without great 
difficulty and the concurrence of many favourable accidents; and 
many generations may pass before there is any likelihood of their 
being formed into a society. 

Hor. That men are formed into societies we see. But if they are 
all born with that false notion and they can never be undeceived, 
which way do you account for it? 



FABLE OF THE BEES 209 

Cleo. My opinion concerning this matter is this: self-preserva- 
tion bids all creatures gratify their appetites, and that of propa- 
gating his kind never fails to affect a man in health many years 
before he comes to his full growth. If a wild man and a wild 
woman should meet very young and live together for fifty years 
undisturbed in a mild wholesome climate where there is plenty of 
provisions, they might see a prodigious number of descendants. 
For in the wild state of nature, man multiplies his kind much 
faster than can be allowed of in any regular society. No male at 
fourteen would be long without a female if he could get one; and 
no female of twelve would be refractory if applied to or remain 
long uncourted if there were men. 

Hor. Considering that consanguinity would be no bar among 
these people, the progeny of two savages might soon amount to 
hundreds. All this I can grant you; but as parents, no better quali- 
fied, could teach their children but little, it would be impossible 
for them to govern these sons and daughters when they grew up 
if none of them had any notions of right or wrong; and society 
is as far off as ever; the false principle, which you say all men are 
born with, is an obstacle never to be surmounted. 

Cleo. From that false principle, as you call it, the right men 
naturally claim to everything they can get, it must follow that man 
will look upon his children as his property and make such use 
of them as is most consistent with his interest, 

Hor. What is the interest of a wild man that pursues nothing 
with steadiness? 

Cleo. The demand of the predominant passion for the time it 
lasts. 

Hor. That may change every moment, and such children would 
be miserably managed. 

Cleo. That is true; but still managed they would be; I mean 
they would be kept under and forced to do as they were bid, at 
least till they were strong enough to resist. Natural affection would 
prompt a wild man to love and cherish his child; it would make 
him provide food and other necessaries for his son till he was ten 
or twelve years old, or perhaps longer. But this affection is not the 
only passion he has to gratify; if his son provokes him by stub- 
bornness or doing otherwise than he would have him, this love 
is suspended; and if his displeasure be strong enough to raise his 



210 FABLE OF THE BEES 

anger, which is as natural to him as any other passion, it is ten 
to one but he will knock him down. If he hurts him very much 
and the condition he has put his son in moves his pity, his anger 
will cease; and, natural affection returning, he will fondle him 
again and be sorry for what he has done. Now if we consider 
that all creatures hate and endeavour to avoid pain and that 
benefits beget love in all that receive them, we shall find that 
the consequence of this management would be that the savage 
child would learn to love and fear his father. These two passions, 
together with the esteem which we naturally have for everything 
that far excels us, will seldom fail of producing that compound 
which we call reverence. 

Hor. I have it now; you have opened my eyes, and I see the 
origin of society as plain as I do that table. 

Cleo. I am afraid the prospect is not so clear yet as you imagine. 

Hor. Why so? The grand obstacles are removed. Untaught men, 
it is true, when they are grown up are never to be governed; and 
our subjection is never sincere where the superiority of the gov- 
ernor is not very apparent. But both these are obviated; the rev- 
erence we have for a person when we are young is easily continued 
as long as we live; and where authority is once acknowledged 
and that acknowledgement well established, it cannot be a 
difficult matter to govern. If thus a man may keep up his author- 
ity over his children, he will do it still with greater ease over his 
grandchildren; for a child that has the least reverence for his 
parents, will seldom refuse homage to the person to whom he sees 
his father pay it. Besides, a man's pride would be a sufficient 
motive for him to maintain the authority once gained; and, if some 
of his progeny proved refractory, he would leave no stone unturned 
by the help of the rest to reduce the disobedient. The old man 
being dead, the authority from him would devolve upon the eldest 
of his children, and so on. 

Cleo. I thought you would go on too fast. If the wild man had 
understood the nature of things and been endued with general 
knowledge and a language ready made, as Adam was by miracle, 
what you say might have been easy; but an ignorant creature that 
knows nothing but what his own experience has taught him is no 
more fit to govern than he is fit to teach the mathematics. 

Hor. He would not have above one or two children to govern 



FABLE OF THE BEES 211 

at first; and his experience would increase by degrees, as well as 
his family. This would require no such consummate knowledge. 

Cleo. I do not say it would. An ordinary capacity of a man 
tolerably well educated would be sufficient to begin with; but a 
man who never had been taught to curb any of his passions would 
be very unfit for such a task. He would make his children, as 
soon as they were able, assist him in getting food and teach them 
how and where to procure it. Savage children, as they got strength, 
would endeavour to imitate every action they saw their parents do 
and every sound they heard them make; but all the instructions 
they received would be confined to things immediately necessary. 
Savage parents would often take offence at their children, as they 
grew up, without a cause; and as these increased in years, so 
natural affection would decrease in the other. The consequence 
would be that the children would often suffer for failings that were 
not their own. Savages would often discover faults in the conduct 
of what was past; but they would not be able to establish rules for 
future behaviour which they would approve of themselves for any 
continuance; and want of foresight would be an inexhaustible 
fund for changes in their resolutions. The savage's wife as well 
as himself would be highly pleased to see their daughters im- 
pregnated and bring forth; and they would both take great delight 
in their grandchildren. 

HOT. I thought that in all creatures the natural affection of par- 
ents had been confined to their own young ones. 

Cleo. It is so in all but man; there is no species but ours that 
are so conceited of themselves as to imagine everything to be 
theirs. The desire of dominion is a never-failing consequence of 
the pride that is common to all men; and which the brat of a 
savage is as much born with as the son of an emperor. This good 
opinion we have of ourselves makes men not only claim a right 
to their children, but likewise imagine that they have a great share 
of jurisdiction over their grandchildren. The young ones of other 
animals, as soon as they can help themselves, are free; but the 
authority which parents pretend to have over their children never 
ceases. How general and unreasonable this eternal claim is natu- 
rally in the heart of man we may learn from the laws which, to 
prevent the usurpation of parents and rescue children from their 
dominion, every civil society is forced to make, limiting paternal 



212 FABLE OF THE BEES 

authority to a certain term of years. Our savage pair would have a 
double title to their grandchildren from their undoubted property 
in each parent of them; and all the progeny being sprung from 
their own sons and daughters without intermixture of foreign 
blood, they would look upon the whole race to be their natural 
vassals; and I am persuaded that the more knowledge and capacity 
of reasoning this first couple acquired, the more just and unques- 
tionable their sovereignty over all their descendants would appear 
to them, though they should love to see the fifth or sixth genera- 
tion. 

Hor. Is it not strange that nature should send us all into the 
world with a visible desire after government and no capacity for 
it at all? 

Cleo. What seems strange to you, is an undeniable instance of 
Divine Wisdom. For if all had not been born with this desire, all 
must have been destitute of it; and multitudes could never have 
been formed into societies if some of them has not been possessed 
of this thirst of dominion. Creatures may commit force upon them- 
selves, they may learn to warp their natural appetites and divert 
them from their proper objects, but peculiar instincts that belong 
to a whole species are never to be acquired by art or discipline; 
and those that are born without them must remain destitute of 
them forever. Ducks run to the water as soon as they are hatched; 
but you can never make a chicken swim any more than you can 
teach it to suck. 

Hor. 1 understand you very well. If pride had not been innate 
to all men, none of them could ever have been ambitious. And as 
to the capacity of governing, experience shows us that it is to be 
acquired; but how to bring society into the world, I know no more 
than the wild man himself. What you have suggested to me of his 
unskilfulness and want of power to govern himself has quite de- 
stroyed all the hopes I had conceived of society from this family. 
But would religion have no influence 'upon them? Pray, how came 
that into the world? 

Cleo. From God, by miracle. 

Hor. Obscurum per obscurius.* I do not understand miracles 



"Obscurity [explained] by greater obscurity. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 213 

that break in upon and subvert the order of nature; and I have no 
notion of things that come to pass en depit de bans sens and are 
such, that judging from sound reason and known experience, all 
wise men would think themselves mathematically sure that they 
could never happen. 

Cleo. It is certain that by the word miracle is meant an interposi- 
tion of the Divine Power when it deviates from the common course 
of nature. 

Hor. As when matters easily combustible remain whole and 
untouched in the midst of a fire fiercely burning or lions in vigour 
industriously kept hungry forbear eating what they are most greedy 
after. These miracles are strange things. 

Cleo. They -are not pretended to be otherwise; the etymology 
of the word imports it; but it is almost as unaccountable, that men 
should disbelieve them and pretend to be of a religion that is alto- 
gether built upon miracles. 

Eor. But when I asked you that general question, why did you 
confine yourself to revealed religion? 

Cleo. Because nothing, in my opinion, deserves the name of 
religion that has not been revealed; the Jewish was the first that 
was national, and the Christian the next. 

Hor. But Abraham, Noah, and Adam himself were no Jews, 
and yet they had religion. 

Cleo. No other than what was revealed to them. God appeared 
to our first parents and gave them commands immediately after 
he had created them. The same intercourse was continued between 
the Supreme Being and the Patriarchs; but the father of Abraham 
was an idolater. 

Hor. But the Egyptians, the Greeks, and the Romans had reli- 
gion as well as the Jews. 

Cleo. Their gross idolatry and abominable worship I call super- 
stition. 

Hor. You may be as partial as you please, but they all called 
their worship religion as well as we do ours. You say man brings 
nothing with him but his passions; and when I asked you how reli- 
gion came into the world, I meant what is there in man's nature, 
that is not acquired, from which he has a tendency to religion; 
what is it that disposes him to it? 



214 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Cleo. Fear. 

Hor. How! Primus in orbe Deos fecit timor.* Are you of that 
opinion? 

Cleo. No man upon earth less. But that noted Epicurean axiom 
which irreligious men are so fond of is a very poor one; and it is 
silly as well as impious to say that fear made a God; you may as 
justly say that fear made grass or the sun and the moon; but when 
I am speaking of savages, it is not clashing either with good sense 
nor the Christian religion to assert that whilst such men are igno- 
rant of the true Deity and yet very defective in the art of thinking 
and reasoning, fear is the passion that first gives them an oppor- 
tunity of entertaining some glimmering notions of an invisible 
Power; which afterwards, as by practice and experience they grow 
greater proficients and become more perfect in the labour of the 
brain and the exercise of their highest faculty, will infallibly lead 
them to the certain knowledge of an Infinite and Eternal Being; 
whose power and wisdom will always appear the greater and more 
stupendous to them the more they themselves advance in knowl- 
edge and penetration, though both should be carried on to a much 
higher pitch than it is possible for our limited nature ever to 
arrive at. 

Hor: I beg your pardon for suspecting you, though I am glad 
it gave you an opportunity of explaining yourself. The word fear 
without any addition sounded very harsh; and even now I cannot 
conceive how an invisible cause should become the object of a 
man's fear, that should be so entirely untaught as you have made 
the first savage; which way can anything invisible and that affects 
none of the senses make an impression upon a wild creature? 

Cleo. Every mischief and every disaster that happens to him of 
which the cause is not very plain and obvious; excessive heat and 
cold; wet and drought that are offensive; thunder and lightning, 
even when they do no visible hurt; noises in the dark, obscurity 
itself, and everything that is frightful and unknown, are all admin- 
istering and contributing to the establishment of this fear. The wild- 
est man that can be conceived, by the time that he came to maturity, 
would be wise enough to know that fruits and other eatables are 
not to be had either always or everywhere: this would naturally 



*Statius, Thebiad, III, 661 : Fear first made the gods in the world. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 215 

put him upon hoarding when he had good store; his provision 
might be spoiled by the rain; he would see that trees were blasted 
and yielded not always the same plenty; he might not always be in 
health, or his young ones might grow sick, and die without any 
wounds or external force to be seen. Some of these accidents might 
at first escape his attention or only alarm his weak understanding 
without occasioning much reflection for some time; but as they 
come often, he would certainly begin to suspect some invisible 
cause; and as his experience increased, be confirmed hi his sus- 
picion. It is likewise highly probable that a variety of different 
sufferings would make him apprehend several such causes and at 
least induce him to believe that there was a great number of them 
which he had to fear. What would very much contribute to this 
credulous disposition and naturally lead him into such a belief is 
a false notion we imbibe very early and which we may observe in 
infants as soon as by their looks, their gestures, and the signs they 
make they begin to be intelligible to us. 

Hor. What is that, pray? 

Cleo. All young children seem to imagine that everything thinks 
and feels in the same manner as they do themselves; and that they 
generally have this wrong opinion of things inanimate is evident 
from a common practice among them whenever they labour under 
any misfortune which their own wildness and want of care have 
drawn upon them. In all such cases you see them angry at and 
strike a table, a chair, the floor, or anything else that can seem to 
have been accessory to their hurting themselves or the production 
of any other blunder they have committed. Nurses we see, in com- 
pliance to their frailty, seem to entertain the same ridiculous senti- 
ment and actually appease wrathful brats by pretending to take 
their part. Thus you will often see them very serious in scolding 
at and beating either the real object of the baby's indignation or 
something else on which the blame of what has happened may be 
thrown with any show of probability. It is not to be imagined that 
this natural folly should be so easily cured in a child that is 
destitute of all instruction and commerce with his own species as 
it is in those that are brought up in society and hourly improved 
by conversing with others that are wiser than themselves; and I 
am persuaded that a wild man would never get entirely rid of it 
whilst he lived. 



216 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Hor. I cannot think so meanly of human understanding. 

Cieo. Whence came the Dryades and Hama-Dryades? How 
came it ever to be thought impious to cut down or even to wound 
large venerable oaks or other stately trees; and what root did the 
Divinity spring from, which the vulgar among the ancient heathens 
apprehended to be in rivers and fountains? 

Hor. From the roguery of designing priests and other impostors 
that invented those lies and made fables for their own advantage. 

Cleo. But still it must have been want of understanding; and 
a tincture, some remainder of that folly which is discovered in 
young children, that could induce or would suffer men to believe 
those fables. Unless fools actually had frailties, knaves could not 
make use of them. 

Hor. There may be something in it; but be that as it will, you 
have owned that man naturally loves those he receives benefits 
from; therefore, how comes it that man, finding all the good things 
he enjoys to proceed from an invisible cause, his gratitude should 
not sooner prompt him to be religious than his fear? 

Cleo. There are several substantial reasons why it does not. 
Man takes everything to be his own, which he has from nature: 
sowing and reaping, he thinks, deserve a crop, and whatever he 
has the 4east hand in is always reckoned to be his. Every art and 
every invention, as soon as we know them, are our right and prop- 
erty; and whatever we perform by the assistance of them is by the 
courtesy of the species to itself deemed to be our own. We make 
use of fermentation and all the chemistry of nature without think- 
ing ourselves beholden to anything but our own knowledge. She that 
churns the cream makes the butter, without inquiring into the 
power by which the thin lymphatic particles are forced to separate 
themselves and slide away from the more unctuous. In brewing, 
baking, cooking, and almost everything we have a hand in, nature 
is the drudge that makes all the alterations and does the principal 
work; yet all, forsooth, is our own. From all which it is manifest 
that man, who is naturally for making everything centre in him- 
self, must in his wild state have a great tendency and be very 
prone to look upon everything he enjoys as his due and everything 
he meddles with as his own performance. It requires knowledge 
and reflection; and a man must be pretty far advanced in the art 
of thinking justly and reasoning consequentially before he can 



FABLE OF THE BEES 217 

from his own light and without being taught be sensible of his 
obligations to God. The less a man knows and the more shallow 
his understanding is, the less he is capable either of enlarging his 
prospect of things or drawing consequences from the little which 
he does know. Raw, ignorant, and untaught men, fix their eyes 
on what is immediately before and seldom look further than, as 
it is vulgarly expressed, the length of their noses. The wild man, 
if gratitude moves him, would much sooner pay his respects to the 
tree he gathers his nuts from than he would think of an acknowl- 
edgment to him who had planted it; and there is no property so 
well established but a civilized man would suspect his title to it 
sooner than a wild one would question the sovereignty he has over 
his own breath. Another reason why fear is an elder motive to 
religion than gratitude is that an untaught man would never sus- 
pect that the same cause which he received good from would ever 
do him hurt; and evil without doubt would always gain his atten- 
tion first. 

Hor. Men, indeed, seem to remember one ill turn that is served 
them better than ten good ones; one month's sickness better than 
ten years' health. 

Cleo. In all the labours of self-preservation man is intent on 
avoiding what is hurtful to him; but in the enjoyment of what is 
pleasant his thoughts are relaxed, and he is void of care; he can 
swallow a thousand delights, one after another, without asking 
questions; but the least evil makes him inquisitive whence it came 
in order to shun it. It is very material, therefore, to know the cause 
of evil; but to know that of good, which is always welcome, is of 
little use; that is, such a knowledge seems not to promise any addi- 
tion to his happiness. When a man once apprehends such an 
invisible enemy, it is reasonable to think that he would be glad 
to appease and make him his friend if he could find him out; it 
is highly probable, likewise, that in order to [do] this, he would 
search, investigate, and look everywhere about him; and that find- 
nig all his inquiries upon earth in vain, he would lift up his eyes 
to the sky. 

Hor. And so a wild man might; and look down and up again 
long enough before he would be the wiser. I can easily conceive 
that a creature must labour under great perplexities when it actu- 
ally fears something of which it knows neither what it is nor where 



218 FABLE OF THE BEES 

it is; and that, though a man had all the reason in the world to 
think it invisible, he would still be more afraid of it in the dark 
than when he could see. 

Cleo. Whilst a man is but an imperfect thinker and wholly em- 
ployed in furthering self-preservation hi the most simple manner 
and removing the immediate obstacles he meets with hi that pur- 
suit, this affair perhaps affects him but little; but when he comes 
to be a tolerable reasoner and has leisure to reflect, it must pro- 
duce strange chimeras and surmises; and a wild couple would not 
converse together long before they would endeavour to express 
their minds to one another concerning this matter; and as in time 
they would invent and agree upon certain sounds of distinction for 
several things of which the ideas would often occur, so I believe 
that this invisible cause would be one of the first which they would 
coin a name for. A wild man and a wild woman would not take 
less care of their helpless brood than other animals; and it is not 
to be imagined but the children that were brought up by them, 
though without instruction or discipline, would before they were 
ten years old observe in their parents this fear of an invisible cause. 
It is incredible likewise, considering how much men differ from 
one another in features, complexion, and temper, that all should 
form the same idea of this cause; from whence it would follow 
that as soon as any considerable number of men could intelligibly 
converse together, it would appear that there were different opin- 
ions among them concerning the invisible cause; the fear and 
acknowledgment of it being universal and man always attributing 
his own passions to everything which he conceives to think, every- 
body would be solicitous to avoid the hatred and ill-will and, if it 
was possible, to gain the friendship of such a power. If we con- 
sider these things and what we know of the nature of man, it is 
hardly to be conceived that any considerable number of our species 
could have any intercourse together long in peace or otherwise 
but wilful lies would be raised concerning this power, and some 
would pretend to have seen or heard it. How different opinions 
about invisible power may by the malice and deceit of im- 
posters be made the occasion of mortal enmity among multitudes 
is easily accounted for. If we want rain very much and I can be per- 
suaded that it is your fault we have none, there needs no greater 
cause to quarrel; and nothing has happened in the world of priest- 



FABLE OF THE BEES 219 

craft or inhumanity, folly or abomination, on religious accounts, 
that cannot be solved or explained with the least trouble from 
these data and the principle or fear. 

Hor. I think I must yield to you that the first motive of religion 
among savages was fear; but you must allow me hi your turn that 
from the general thankfulness that nations have always paid to 
their gods for signal benefits and success; the many hecatombs 
that have been offered after victories; and the various institutions 
of games and festivals; it is evident that when men came to be 
wiser and more civilized, the greatest part of their religion was 
built upon gratitude. 

Cleo. You labour hard, I see, to vindicate the honour of our 
species; but we have no such cause to boast of it; and I shall 
demonstrate to you that a well-weighed consideration and a thor- 
ough understanding of our nature will give us much less reason 
to exult in our pride than it will furnish us with, for the exercise 
of our humility. In the first place, there is no difference between 
the original nature of a savage and that of a civilized man: they 
are both born with fear; and neither of them, if they have their 
senses about them, can live many years, but an invisible Power 
will at one time or other become the object of that fear; and this 
will happen to every man, whether he be wild and alone or in 
society and under the best of discipline. We know by experience 
that empires, states, and kingdoms may excel in arts and sciences, 
politeness, and all worldly wisdom and at the same tune be slaves 
to the grossest idolatry and submit to all the inconsistencies of a 
false religion. The most civilized people have been as foolish and 
absurd in sacred worship as it is possible for any savages to be; 
and the first have often been guilty of studied cruelties, which the 
latter would never have thought of. The Carthaginians were a 
subtle flourishing people, an opulent and formidable nation, and 
Hannibal had half conquered the Romans when still to their idols 
they sacrificed the children of their chief nobility. And, as to pri- 
vate persons, there are innumerable instances in the most polite 
ages of men of sense and virtue that have entertained the most 
miserable, unworthy, and extravagant notions of the Supreme 
Being. What confused and unaccountable apprehensions must not 
some men have had of Providence to act as they did! Alexander 
Severus, who succeeded Heliogabalus, was a great reformer of 



220 FABLE OF THE BEES 

abuses and thought to be as good a prince as his predecessor was a 
bad one. In his palace he had an oratory, a cabinet set aside for his 
private devotion, where he had the images of Apollonius Tya- 
naeus, Orpheus, Abraham, Jesus Christ, and such like gods, says 
his historian. What makes you smile? 

Hor. To think how industrious priests are in concealing a man's 
failings when they would have you think well of him. What you 
say of Severus I had read before; when looking one day for some- 
thing in Moreri, I happened to cast my eye on the article of that 
emperor where no mention is made either of Orpheus or Apol- 
lonius! which, remembering the passage in Lampridius, I wondered 
at; and thinking I might have been mistaken, I again consulted 
that author, where I found it as you have related it. I do not 
question but Moreri left this out on purpose to repay the civilities 
of the emperor to the Christians, whom, he tells us, Severus had 
been very favourable to. 

Cleo. That is not impossible in a Roman Catholic. But what 
I would speak to in the second place is the festivals you men- 
tioned, the hetacombs after victories, and the general thankfulness 
of nations to their gods. I desire you would consider that in sacred 
matters, as well as all human affairs, there are rites and ceremonies 
and many demonstrations of respect to be seen that to outward 
appearance seem to proceed from gratitude, which upon due 
examination will be found to have been originally the result of 
fear. At what time the floral games were first instituted is not well 
known; but they never were celebrated every year constantly 
before a very unseasonable spring put the senate upon the decree 
that made them annual. To make up the true compound of rev- 
erence or veneration, love and esteem are as necessary ingredients 
as fear; but the latter alone is capable of making men counterfeit 
both the former, as is evident from the duties that are outwardly 
paid to tyrants at the same time that inwardly they are execrated 
and hated. Idolaters have always behaved themselves to every 
invisible cause they adored as men do to a lawless arbitrary power, 
when they reckon it as captious, haughty, and unreasonable as 
they allow it to be sovereign, unlimited, and irresistible. What mo- 
tive could the frequent repetitions of the same solemnities spring 
from whenever it was suspected that the least holy trifle had been 
omitted? You know how often the same farce was once acted 



FABLE OF THE BEES 221 

over again, because after every performance there was still room 
to apprehend that something had been neglected. Do but consult, 
I beg of you, and call to mind your own reading; cast your eyes 
on the infinite variety of ideas men have formed to themselves and 
the vast multitude of divisions they have made of the invisible 
cause which everyone imagines to influence human affairs; run 
over the history of all ages; look into every considerable nation, 
their straits and calamities, as well as victories and successes; the 
lives of great generals and other famous men, their adverse fortune 
and prosperity; mind at which times their devotion was most fer- 
vent; when oracles were most consulted, and on what accounts 
the gods were most frequently addressed. Do but calmly consider 
everything you can remember relating to superstition, whether 
grave, ridiculous, or execrable, and you will find, in the first place, 
that the heathens and all that have been ignorant of the true Deity, 
though many of them were persons otherwise of great knowledge, 
fine understanding, and tried probity, have represented their gods, 
not as wise, benign, equitable, and merciful; but, on the contrary, 
as passionate, revengeful, capricious, and unrelenting beings; not 
to mention the abominable vices and gross immoralities the vulgar 
were taught to ascribe to them. In the second, that for every one 
instance that men have addressed themselves to an invisible cause 
from a principle of gratitude, there are a thousand in every false 
religion to convince you that divine worship and men's submission 
to Heaven have always proceeded from their fear. The word 
religion itself and the fear of God are synonomous; and had man's 
acknowledgment been originally founded in love as it is in fear, 
the craft of impostors could have made no advantage of the pas- 
sion; and all their boasted acquaintance with gods and goddesses 
would have been useless to them if men had worshipped the 
immortal powers, as they called their idols, out of gratitude. 

Hor. All lawgivers and leaders of people gained their point and 
acquired what they expected from those pretences, which is rever- 
ence; and which to produce, you have owned yourself, love and 
esteem to be as requisite as fear. 

Cleo. But from the laws they imposed on men and the punish- 
ments they annexed to the breach and neglect of them, it is easily 
seen which of the ingredients they most relied upon. 

Hor. It would be difficult to name a long or other great man 



222 FABLE OF THE BEES 

in very ancient times who attempted to govern an infant nation, 
that laid no claim to some commerce or other with an invisible 
power, either held by himself or his ancestors. Between them and 
Moses there is no other difference than that he alone was a true 
prophet and really inspired, and all the rest were impostors. 

Cleo. What would you infer from this? 

Hor. That we can say no more for ourselves than what men of 
all parties and persuasions have done in all ages, everyone for 
their cause, viz. that they alone were in the right and all that dif- 
fered from them in the wrong. 

Cleo. Is it not sufficient that we can say this of ourselves with 
truth and justice after the strictest examination, when no other 
cause can stand any test or bear the least inquiry? A man may 
relate miracles that never were wrought and give an account of 
things that never happened, but a thousand years hence all know- 
ing men will agree that nobody could have wrote Sir Isaac New- 
ton's Principia unless he had been a great mathematician. When 
Moses acquainted the Israelites with what had been revealed to 
him, he told them a truth which nobody then upon earth knew 
but himself. 

HOT. You mean the unity of God and His being the Author of 
the universe. 

Cleo. I do so. 

HOT. But is not every man of sense capable of knowing this 
from his reason? 

Cleo. Yes, when the art of reasoning consequentially is come to 
that perfection which it has been arrived at these several hundred 
years and himself has been led into the method of thinking justly. 
Every common sailor could steer a course through the midst of 
the ocean as soon as the use of the lodestone and the mariner's 
compass were invented. But before that the most expert navigator 
would have trembled at the thoughts of such an enterprise. When 
Moses acquainted and imbued the posterity of Jacob with this 
sublime and important truth, they were degenerated into slaves, 
attached to the superstitution of the country they dwelled in; and 
the Egyptians, their masters, though they were great proficients 
in many arts and sciences and more deeply skilled in the mysteries 
of nature than any other nation then was, had the most abject 
and abominable notions of the Deity which it is possible to con- 



FABLE OF THE BEES 223 

ceive; and no savages could have exceeded their ignorance and 
stupidity as to the Supreme Being, the invisible cause that gov- 
erns the world. He taught the Israelites a priori; and their children, 
before they were nine or ten years old, knew what the greatest 
philosophers did not attain to by the light of nature till many 
ages after. 

Hod. The advocates for the ancients will never allow that 
any modern philosophers have either thought or reasoned better 
than men did in former ages. 

Cleo. Let them believe their eyes. What you say every man of 
sense may know by his own reason was in the beginning of Chris- 
tianity contested and denied with zeal and vehemence by the 
greatest men. in Rome. Celsus, Symmachus, Porphyry, Hierocles, 
and other famous rhetoricians and men of unquestionable good 
sense wrote in defence of idolatry and strenuously maintained the 
plurality and multiplicity of their gods. Moses lived above fifteen 
hundred years before the reign of Augustus. If in a place where 
I was very well assured that nobody understood anything of col- 
ouring or drawing, a man should tell me that he had acauired 
the art of painting by inspiration, I should be more ready to laugh 
at him than to believe him; but if I saw him draw several fine 
portraits before my face, my unbelief would cease and I should 
think it ridiculous any longer to suspect his veracity. All the 
accounts that other lawgivers and founders of nations have given 
of the deities which they or their predecessors conversed with 
contained ideas that were unworthy of the Divine Being; and by 
the fight of nature only, it is easily proved that they must have 
been false. But the image which Moses gave the Jews of the 
Supreme Being, that He was One and had made heaven and earth, 
will stand all tests and is a truth that will outlast the world. Thus 
I think I have fully proved, on the one hand, that all true religion 
must be revealed and could not have come into the world without 
miracle; and, on the other, that what all men are born with towards 
religion before they receive any instruction is fear. 

HOT. You have convinced me many ways that we are poor crea- 
tures by nature; but I cannot help struggling against those mor- 
tifying truths when I hear them started first. I long to hear the 
origin of society, and I continually retard your account of it myself 
with new questions. 



224 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Cleo. Do you remember where we left off? 

HOT. I do not think we have made any progress yet; for we have 
nothing towards it but a wild man and a wild woman with some 
children and grandchildren, which they are not able either to teach 
or govern. 

Cleo. I thought that the introduction of the reverence which 
the wildest son must feel, more or less, for the most savage father, 
if he stays with him, had been a considerable step. 

Hor. I thought so too, till you destroyed the hopes I had con- 
ceived of it yourself by showing me the incapacity of savage par- 
ents to make use of it. And since we are still as far from the origin 
of society as ever we were or ever can be in my opinion, I desire 
that before you proceed to that main point, you would answer 
what you have put off once already, which is my question con- 
cerning the notions of right and wrong. I cannot be easy before I 
have your sentiments on this head. 

Cleo. Your demand is very reasonable, and I will satisfy you 
as well as I can. A man of sense, learning, and experience that 
has been well educated will always find out the difference between 
right and wrong in things diametrically opposite; and there are 
certain facts which he will always condemn and others which he 
will always approve of. To kill a member of the same society that 
has not offended us, or to rob him, will always be bad; and to 
cure the sick and be beneficient to the public, he will always pro- 
nounce to be good actions; and for a man to do as he will be 
done by, he will always say is a good rule in life; and not only men 
of great accomplishments and such as have learned to think ab- 
stractly, but all men of middling capacities that have been brought 
up in society will agree in this in all countries and in all ages. 
Nothing likewise seems more true to all that have made any toler- 
able use of their faculty of thinking than that out of the society 
before any division was made, either by contract or otherwise, all 
men would have an equal right to the earth. But do you believe 
that our wild man, if he had never seen any other human creature 
but his savage consort and his progeny, would ever have enter- 
tained the same notions of right and wrong? 

Hor. Hardly; his small capacity in the art of reasoning would 
hinder him from doing it so justly; and the power he found he 
had over his children would render him very arbitrary. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 225 

Cleo. But without that incapacity, suppose that at three-score 
he was by a miracle to receive a fine judgment and the faculty of 
thinking and reasoning consequentially in as great a perfection as 
the wisest man ever did, do you think he would ever alter his 
notion of the right he had to everything he could manage or have 
other sentiments in relation to himself and his progeny than from 
his behaviour it appeared he entertained when he seemed to act 
almost altogether by instinct? 

Hor. Without doubt. For if judgment and reason were given him, 
what could hinder him from making use of those faculties as well 
as others do? 

Cleo. You seem not to consider that no man can reason but a 
posteriori from something that he knows or supposes to be true. 
What I said of the difference between right and wrong, I spoke 
of persons who remembered their education and lived in society; 
or at least such as plainly saw others of their own species that were 
independent of them and either their equals or superiors. 

Hor. I begin to believe you are in the right. But at second 
thoughts, why might not a man with great justice think himself 
the sovereign of a place where he knew no human creature but 
his own wife and the descendants of both? 

Cleo. With all my heart. But may there not be an hundred such 
savages in the world with large families that might never meet nor 
ever hear of one another? 

Hor. A thousand, if you will, and then there would be so many 
natural sovereigns. 

Cleo. Very well; what I would have you observe is that there 
are things which are commonly esteemed to be eternal truths that 
an hundred or a thousand people of fine sense and judgment could 
have no notion of. What if it should be true that every man is 
born with this domineering spirit and that we cannot be cured of 
it but by our commerce with others and the experience of facts, 
by which we are convinced that we have no such right? Let us 
examine a man's whole life from his infancy to his grave and see 
which of the two seems to be most natural to him: a desire of 
superiority and grasping everything to himself, or a tendency to 
act according to the reasonable notions of right and wrong; and 
we shall find that in his early youth the first is very conspicuous; 
that nothing appears of the second before he has received some 



226 FABLE OF THE BEES 

instructions, and that this latter will always have less influence 
upon his actions the more uncivilized he remains. From whence I 
infer that the notions of right and wrong are acquired; for if they 
were as natural, or if they affected us as early as the opinion or 
rather the instinct we are born with of taking everything to be 
our own, no child would ever cry for his eldest brother's play- 
things. 

Hor. I think there is no right more natural nor more reason- 
able than that which men have over their children; and what we 
owe our parents can never be repaid. 

Cleo. The obligations we have to good parents for their care 
and education is certainly very great. 

Hor. That is the least. We are indebted to them for our being; 
we might be educated by an hundred others but without them we 
could never have existed. 

Cleo. So we could have no malt liquor without the ground that 
bears the barley: I know no obligations for benefits that never 
were intended. Should a man see a fine parcel of cherries, be 
tempted to eat, and devour them accordingly with great satisfac- 
tion, it is possible he might swallow some of the stones, which we 
know by experience do not digest. If twelve or fourteen months 
after, he should find a little sprig of a cherry-tree growing in a 
field where nobody would expect it, if he recollected the time he 
had been there before, it is not improbable that he might guess at 
the true reason how it came there. It is possible, likewise, that 
for curiosity's sake this man might take up this plant and take 
care of it; I am well assured that whatever became of it afterwards, 
the right he would have to it from the merit of his action would 
be the same which a savage would have to his child. 

Hor. I think there would be a vast difference between the one 
and the other; the cherry-stone was never part of himself nor 
mixed with his blood. 

Cleo. Pardon me; all the difference, as vast as you take it to be, 
can only consist in this, that the cherry-stone was not part of the 
man who swallowed it so long, nor received so great an alteration 
in its figure whilst it was, as some other things which the savage 
swallowed were, and received in their figure whilst they stayed 
with him. 

Hor. But he that swallowed the cherry-stone did nothing to it; 



FABLE OF THE BEES 227 

it produced a plant as a vegetable, which it might have done as 
well without his swallowing it. 

Cleo. That is true; and I own that as to the cause to which the 
plant owes its existence, you are in the right; but I plainly spoke 
as to the merit of the action, which in either case could only 
proceed from their intentions as free agents; and the savage might 
and would in all probability act with as little design to get a child 
as the other had eat cherries in order to plant a tree. It is com- 
monly said that our children are our own flesh and blood; but 
this way of speaking is strangely figurative. However, allow it to 
be just, though rhetoricians have no name for it, what does it 
prove, what benevolence in us, what kindness to others in the 
intention? 

Hor. You shall say what you please, but I think that nothing 
can endear children to their parents more than the reflection that 
they are their own flesh and blood. 

Cleo. I am of your opinion; and it is a plain demonstration of 
the superlative value we have for our own selves and everything 
that comes from us if it be good and counted laudable; whereas 
other things that are offensive, though equally our own, are hi 
compliment to ourselves industriously concealed; and as soon as 
it is agreed upon that anything is unseemly and rather a disgrace 
to us than otherwise, presently it becomes ill manners to name 
or so much as to hint at it. The contents of the stomach are vari- 
ously disposed of, but we have no hand in that; and whether they 
go to the blood or elsewhere, the last thing we did to them volun- 
tarily and with our knowledge was swallowing them; and whatever 
is afterwards performed by the animal economy, a man contributes 
no more to than he does to the going of his watch. This is another 
instance of the unjust claim we lay to every performance we are 
but in the least concerned in, if good comes of it, though nature 
does all the work; but whoever places a merit in his prolific faculty 
ought likewise to expect the blame when he has the stone or a 
fever. Without this violent principle of innate folly no rational 
creature would value himself on his free agency and at the same 
time accept of applause for actions that are visibly independent of 
his will. Life in all creatures is a compound action, but the share 
they have in it themselves is only passive. We are forced to breathe 
before we know it; and our continuance palpably depends upon 



228 FABLE OF THE BEES 

the guardianship and perpetual tutelage of nature; whilst every 
part of her works, ourselves not excepted, is an impenetrable 
secret to us that eludes all inquiries. Nature furnishes us with all 
the substance of our food herself, nor does she trust to our wis- 
dom for an appetite to crave it; to chew it, she teaches us by 
instinct and bribes us to it by pleasure. This seeming to be an 
action of choice and ourselves being conscious of the performance, 
we perhaps may be said to have a part in it; but the moment after, 
nature resumes her care and, again withdrawn from our knowl- 
edge, preserves us in a mysterious manner without any help or 
concurrence of ours that we are sensible of. Since, then, the man- 
agement of what we have eat and drank remains entirely under 
the direction of nature, what honour or shame ought we to receive 
from any part of the product, whether it is to serve as a doubtful 
means toward generation or yields to vegetation a less fallible 
assistance? It is nature that prompts us to propagate as well as to 
eat; and a savage man multiplies his kind by instinct as other 
animals do without more thought or design of preserving his species 
than a newborn infant has of keeping itself alive in the action of 
sucking. 

H or. .Yet nature gave the different instincts to both for those 
reasons. 

Cleo. Without doubt; but what I mean is that the reason of the 
thing is as much the motive of action in the one as it is in the 
other; and I verily believe that a wild woman who had never seen 
or not minded the production of any young animal, would have 
several children before she would guess at the real cause of them; 
any more than if she had the colic she would suspect that it pro- 
ceeded from some delicious fruit she had eaten, especially if she 
had feasted upon it for several months without perceiving any 
inconveniency from it. Children all the world over are brought 
forth with pain, more or less, which seems to have no affinity with 
pleasure; and an untaught creature, however docile and attentive, 
would want several clear experiments before it would believe that 
the one could produce or be the cause of the other. 

Hor. Most people marry in hopes, and with a design, of having 
children. 

Cleo. I doubt, not; and believe that there are as many that 
would rather not have children, or at least not so fast as often 



FABLE OF THE BEES 229 

they come, as there are that wish for them even in the state of 
matrimony; but out of it, in the amours of thousands that revel 
in enjoyments, children are reckoned to be the greatest calamity 
that can befall them; and often what criminal love gave birth to 
without thought, more criminal pride destroys with purposed and 
considerate cruelty. But all this belongs to people in society that 
are knowing and well acquainted with the natural consequences of 
things; what I urged, I spoke of a savage. 

Hor. Still, the end of love between the different sexes in all 
animals is the preservation of their species. 

Cleo. I have allowed that already. But once more, the savage 
is not prompted to love from that consideration; he propagates 
before he knows the consequence of it; and I much question 
whether the most civilized pair in the most chaste of their embraces 
ever acted from the care of their species as a real principle. A rich 
man may with great impatience wish for a son to inherit his name 
and his estate; perhaps he may marry from no other motive and 
for no other purpose; but all the satisfaction he seems to receive 
from the flattering prospect of an happy posterity can only arise 
from a pleasing reflection on himself as the cause of those de- 
scendants. How much soever this man's posterity might be thought 
to owe him for their being, it is certain that the motive he acted from 
was to oblige himself; still here is a wishing for posterity, a thought 
and design of getting children, which no wild couple could have 
to boast of; yet they would be vain enough to look upon them- 
selves as the principal cause of all their offspring and descendants, 
though they should live to see the fifth or sixth generation. 

Hor. I can find no vanity in that, and I should think them so 
myself. 

Cleo. Yet, as free agents it would be plain that they had con- 
tributed nothing to the existence of their posterity. 

Hor. Now surely you have overshot the mark; nothing? 

Cleo. No, nothing, even to that of their own children know- 
ingly, if you will allow that men have their appetites from nature. 
There is but one real cause in the universe, to produce that infinite 
variety of stupendous effects and all the mighty labours that are 
performed in nature, either within or far beyond the reach of our 
senses. Parents are the efficients of their offspring with no more 
truth or. propriety of speech than the tools of an artificer that were 



230 FABLE OF THE BEES 

made and contrived by himself are the cause of the most elaborate 
of his works. The senseless engine that raises water into the cop- 
per and the passive mash-tub have between them as great a share 
in the art and action of brewing as the liveliest male and female 
ever had in the production of an animal. 

Hor. You make stocks and stones of us; is it not in our choice 
to act or not to act? 

Cleo. Yes, it is my choice now either to run my head against 
the wall or to let it alone; but I hope it does not puzzle you to 
guess which of the two I shall choose. 

Hor. But do not we move our bodies as we list; and is not every 
action determined by the will? 

Cleo. What signifies that, where there is a passion that mani- 
festly sways and with a strict hand governs that will? 

Hor. Still we act with consciousness and are intelligent crea- 
tures. 

Cleo. Not in the affair I speak of; where, willing or not willing, 
we are violently urged from within and in a manner compelled not 
only to assist in, but likewise to long for, and in spite of our teeth 
be highly pleased with a performance that infinitely surpasses our 
understanding. The comparison I made is just in every part of 
it; for the most loving and, if you will, the most sagacious couple 
you can conceive are as ignorant in the mystery of generation, nay, 
must remain, after having had twenty children together, as much 
uninformed and as little conscious of nature's transactions and 
what has been wrought within them, as inanimate utensils are of 
the most mystic and most ingenious operations they have been 
employed in. 

Hor. I do not know any man more expert in tracing human 
pride or more severe in humbling it than yourself; but when the 
subject conies in your way, you do not know how to leave it. I 
wish you would at once go over to the origin of society, which, 
how to derive or bring about at all from the savage family as we 
left it, is past my skill. It is impossible but those children, when 
they grew up, would quarrel on innumerable occasions. If men 
had but three appetites to gratify, that are the most obvious, they 
could never live together in peace, without government. For though 
they all paid a deference to the father, yet if he was a man void of 
all prudence, that could give them no good rules to walk by, I am 



FABLE OF THE BEES 231 

persuaded that they would live in a perpetual state of war; and 
the more numerous his offspring grew, the more the old savage 
would be puzzled between his desire and incapacity of govern- 
ment. As they increased in numbers, they would be forced to 
extend their limits, and the spot they were born upon would not 
hold them long; nobody would be willing to leave his native vale, 
especially if it was a fruitful one. The more I think upon it and 
the more I look into such multitudes, the less I can conceive which 
way they could ever be formed into a society. 

Cleo. The first thing that could make man associate would be 
common danger, which unites the greatest enemies; this danger 
they would certainly be in from wild beasts, considering that no 
uninhabited country is without them, and the defenceless condi- 
tion in which men come into the world. This often must have been 
a cruel article to prevent the increase of our species. 

Hor. The supposition, then, that this wild man with his progeny 
should for fifty years live undisturbed is not very probable, and 
I need not trouble myself about our savages being embarrassed with 
too numerous an offspring. 

Cleo. You say right; there is no probability that a man and 
his progeny, all unarmed, should so long escape the ravenous 
hunger of beasts of prey that are to live upon what animals they 
can get, that leave no place unsearched, nor pains untried, to 
come at food, though with the hazard of their lives. The reason 
why I made that supposition was to show you, first, the improba- 
bility that a wild and altogether untaught man should have the 
knowledge and discretion which Sir William Temple gives him; 
secondly, that children who conversed with their own species, 
though they were brought up by savages, would be governable; 
and consequently, that all such, when come to maturity, would be 
fit for society, how ignorant and unskilful soever their parents 
might have been. 

Hor. I thank you for it; for it has shown me that the very first 
generation of the most brutish savages was sufficient to produce 
sociable creatures, but that to produce a man fit to govern others, 
much more was required. 

Cleo. I return to my conjecture concerning the first motive that 
would make savages associate: it is not possible to know any thing 
with certainty of beginnings, where men were destitute of letters, 



232 FABLE OF THE BEES 

but I think that the nature of the thing makes it highly probable 
that it must have been their common danger from beasts of prey, 
as well such sly ones as lay in wait for their children and the de- 
fenceless animals men made use of for themselves, as the more 
bold that would openly attack grown men and women. What much 
confirms me in this opinion is the general agreement of all the 
relations we have from the most ancient times in different coun- 
tries: for in the infancy of all nations, profane history is stuffed 
with the accounts of the conflicts men had with wild beasts. It 
took up the chief labours of the heroes of remotest antiquity, and 
their greatest prowess was shown in killing of dragons and sub- 
duing of other monsters. 

HOT. Do you lay any stress upon sphinxes, basilisks, flying 
dragons, and bulls that spit fire? 

Cleo. As much as I do on modem witches. But I believe that 
all those fictions had their rise from noxious beasts, the mischiefs 
they did, and other realities that struck terror into man; and I 
believe that if no man had ever been seen on a horse's back, we 
should never have heard of centaurs. The prodigious force and 
rage that are apparent in some savage animals, and the astonishing 
power which, from the various poisons of venomous creatures, 
we are sure must be hid in others; the sudden and unexpected as- 
saults of serpents, the variety of them; the vast bulk of crocodiles; the 
irregular and uncommon shapes of some fishes, and the wings of 
others, are all things that are capable of alarming man's fear; and 
it is incredible what chimeras that passion alone may produce in 
a terrified mind. The dangers of the day often haunt men at night 
with addition of terror, and from what they remember in their 
dreams, it is easy to forge realities. If you will consider, likewise, 
that the natural ignorance of man and his hankering after knowl- 
edge will augment the credulity which hope and fear first give 
birth to; the desire the generality have of applause, and the great 
esteem that is commonly had for the merveitteux, and the wit- 
nesses and relaters of it: if, I say, you will consider all these, you 
will easily discover how many creatures came to be talked of, 
described, and formally painted, that never had any existence. 

Hor. I do not wonder at the origin of monstrous figures or the 
invention of any fables whatever, but in the reason you gave for 
the first motive that would make men combine in one interest, 



FABLE OF THE BEES 233 

I find something perplexing which I own I never thought of be- 
fore. When I reflect on the condition of man as you have set it 
fore me, naked and defenceless, and the multitude of ravenous 
animals that thirst after his blood and are superior to him in 
strength and completely armed by nature, it is inconceivable to 
me how our species should have subsisted. 

Ceo. What you observe is well worthy our attention. 

Hor. It is astonishing. What filthy, abominable beasts are lions 
and tigers! 

Cleo. 1 think them to be very fine creatures; there is nothing 
I admire more than a lion. 

Hor. We have strange accounts of his generosity and gratitude, 
but do you believe them? 

Cleo. I do not trouble my head about them. What I admire is 
his fabric, his structure, and his rage, so justly proportioned to 
one another. There are order, symmetry, and superlative wisdom 
to be observed in all the works of nature, but she has not a machine 
of which every part more visibly answers the end for which the 
whole was formed. 

Hor. The destruction of other animals. 

Cleo. That is true; but how conspicuous is that end, without 
mystery or uncertainty! That grapes were made for wine and man 
for society are truths not accomplished in every individual: but 
there is a real majesty stamped on every single lion, at the sight 
of which the stoutest animals submit and tremble. When we look 
upon and examine his massy talons, the size of them and the 
laboured firmness with which they are fixed in and fastened to that 
prodigious paw, his dreadful teeth, the strength of his jaws, and 
the width of his mouth equally terrible, the use of them is obvious; 
but when we consider, moreover, the make of his limbs, the tough- 
ness of his flesh and tendons, the solidity of his bones beyond that 
of other animals, and the whole frame of him, together with his 
never-ceasing anger, speed, and agility, whilst in the desert he 
ranges king of beasts! When, I say, we consider all these things, it 
is stupidity not to see the design of nature and with what amazing 
skill the beautiful creature is contrived for offensive war and 
conquest. 

Hor. You are a good painter. But after all, why would you 
judge of a creature's nature from what it was perverted to rather 



234 FABLE OF THE BEES 

than from its original, the state it was first produced in? The lion 
in Paradise was a gentle, loving creature. Hear what Milton says 
of his behaviour before Adam and Eve, "as they sate recline on 
the soft downy bank, damask'd with flowers": 

-About them frisking play'd 



All beasts of the earth, since, wild, and of all chase 
In wood or wilderness, forest or den; 
Sporting the lion ramp'd, and in his paw 
Dandel'd the kid; bears, tigers, ounces, pards, 
Gambol'd before them. 

What was it the lion fed upon; what sustenance had all these beasts 
of prey in Paradise? 

Cleo. I do not know. Nobody who believes the Bible doubts 
but that the whole state of Paradise and the intercourse between 
God and the first man were as much preternatural as the creation 
out of nothing; and, therefore, it cannot be supposed that they 
should be accounted for by human reason; and if they were, Moses 
would not be answerable for more than he advanced himself. 
The history which he has given us of those times is extremely 
succinct and ought not to be charged with anything contained in 
the glosses and paraphrases that have been made upon it by 
others. 

Hor. Milton has said nothing of Paradise but what he could 
justify from Moses. 

Cleo. It is nowhere to be proved from Moses that the state of 
innocence lasted so long that goats or any viviparous animals could 
have bred and brought forth young ones. 

Hor. You mean that there could have been no kid. I should 
never have made that cavil in so fine a poem. It was not in my 
thoughts; what I aimed at in repeating those lines was to show 
you how superfluous and impertinent a lion must have been in 
Paradise; and that those who pretend to find fault with the works 
of nature might have censured her with justice for lavishing and 
throwing away so many excellencies upon a great beast to no 
purpose. What a fine variety of destructive weapons, would they 
say, what prodigious strength of limbs and sinews are here given 
to a creature! What to do with? to be quiet and dandle a kid. I 
own that to me this province, the employment assigned to the 



FABLE OF THE BEES 235 

lion, seems to be as proper and well chosen as if you would make 
a nurse of Alexander the Great. 

Cleo. You might make as many flights upon a lion now if you 
saw him asleep. Nobody would think that a bull had occasion for 
horns, who had never seen him otherwise than quietly grazing 
among a parcel of cows; but if one should see him attacked by 
dogs, by a wolf, or a rival of his own species, he would soon find 
out that his horns were of great use and service to him. The lion 
was not made to be always in Paradise. 

Hor. There I would have you. If the lion was contrived for pur- 
poses to be served and executed out of Paradise, then it is mani- 
fest from the very creation that the fall of man was determined 
and predestinated. 

Cleo. Foreknown it was: nothing could be hid from Omni- 
science; that is certain. But that it was predestinated so as to have 
prejudiced or anywise influenced the free will of Adam, I utterly 
deny. But that word predestinated has made so much noise in the 
world, and the thing itself has been the cause of so many fatal 
quarrels, and is so inexplicable, that I am resolved never to engage 
in any dispute concerning it. 

Hor. I cannot make you; but what you have extolled so much 
must have cost the lives of thousands of our species; and it is a 
wonder to me how men, when they were but few, could possibly 
defend themselves before they had firearms, or at least bows 
and arrows; for what number of naked men and women would 
be a match for one couple of lions? 

Cleo. Yet here we are; and none of those animals are suffered 
to be wild in any civilized nation; our superior understanding has 
got the start of them. 

Hor. My reason tells me it must be that; but I cannot help ob- 
serving that when human understanding serves your purpose to 
solve anything, it is always ready and full grown; but at other 
times, knowledge and reasoning are the work of time, and men are 
not capable of thinking justly until after many generations. Pray, 
before men had arms, what could their understanding do against 
lions, and what hindered wild beasts from devouring mankind as 
soon as they were born? 

Cleo. Providence. 

Hor. Daniel, indeed, was saved by miracle; but what is that to 



236 FABLE OF THE BEES 

the rest of mankind? Great numbers, we know, have at different 
times been torn to pieces by savage beasts; what I want to know is 
the reason that any of them escaped and the whole species was 
not destroyed by them, when men had yet no weapons to defend 
nor strongholds to shelter themselves from the fury of those merci- 
less creatures. 

Cleo. 1 have named it to you already, Providence. 

Hor. But which way can you prove this miraculous assistance? 

Cleo. You still talk of miracles, and I speak of Providence or 
the all-governing Wisdom of God. 

Hor. If you can, demonstrate to me how that Wisdom interposed 
between our species and that of lions in the beginning of the 
world without miracle any more than it does at present, eris mihi 
magnus Apollo;* for now, I am sure, a wild lion would prey upon 
a naked man as soon, at least, as he would upon an ox or an horse. 

Cleo. Will not you allow me that all properties, instincts, and 
what we call the nature of things, animate or inanimate, are the 
produce, the effects of that Wisdom? 

Hor. I never thought otherwise. 

Cleo. Then it will not be difficult to prove this to you. Lions are 
never brought forth wild, but in very hot countries, as bears are 
the product of the cold. But the generality of our species, which 
loves moderate warmth, are most delighted with the middle 
regions. Men may against their wills be inured to intense cold or 
by use and patience accustom themselves to excessive heat; but 
a mild air and weather between both extremes being more agree- 
able to human bodies, the greatest part of mankind would naturally 
settle in temperate climate and with the same conveniency as to 
everything else never choose any other. This would very much 
lessen the danger men would be in from the fiercest and most 
irresistible wild beasts. 

Hor. But would lions and tigers in hot countries keep so close 
within their bounds, and bears in cold ones, as never to straggle 
or stray beyond them? 

Cleo. I do not suppose they would; and men as well as cattle 
have often been picked up by lions far from the places where they 



*Virgil, Eclogues, iii, 104: you shall be my great Appollo [i.e., my 
oracle]. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 237 

were whelped. No wild beasts are more fatal to our species than 
often we are to one another; and men pursued by their enemies 
have fled into climates and countries which they would never have 
chose. Avarice, likewise, and curiosity have, without force or 
necessity, often exposed men to dangers which they might have 
avoided if they had been satisfied with what nature required, and 
laboured for self-preservation in that simple manner which crea- 
tures less vain and fantastical content themselves with. In all these 
cases I do not question but multitudes of our species have suf- 
fered from savage beasts and other noxious animals; and on their 
account only, I verily believe, it would have been impossible for 
any number of men to have settled or subsisted in either very hot 
or very cold countries before the invention of bows and arrows, 
or better arms. But all this does nothing to overthrow my asser- 
tion: what I wanted to prove is that all creatures choosing by 
instinct that degree of heat or cold which is most natural to them, 
there would be room enough in the world for man to multiply his 
species for many ages without running almost any risk of being 
devoured either by lions or by bears; and that the most savage 
man would find this out without the help of his reason. This I 
call the work of Providence; by which I mean the unalterable 
wisdom of the Supreme Being in the harmonious disposition of 
the universe; the fountain of that incomprehensible chain of causes 
on which all events have their undoubted dependance. 

Hor. You have made this out better than I had expected; but 
I am afraid that what you alleged as the first motive towards so- 
ciety is come to nothing by it. 

Cleo. Do not fear that; there are other savage beasts against 
which men could not guard themselves unarmed without joining 
and mutual assistance; in temperate climates most uncultivated 
countries abound with wolves. 

Hor. I have seen them in Germany; they are of the size of a 
large mastiff; but I thought their chief prey had been sheep. 

Cleo. Anything they can conquer is their prey; they are des- 
perate creatures and will fall upon men, cows, and horses, as well 
as upon sheep, when they are very hungry; they have teeth like 
mastiffs; but besides them they have sharp claws to tear with, 
which dogs have not. The stoutest man is hardly equal to them in 
strength; but what is worse, they often come in troops, and whole 



238 FABLE OF THE BEES 

villages have been attacked by them; they have five, six, and more 
whelps at a litter and would soon over-run a country where they 
breed, if men did not combine against and make it their business 
to destroy them. Wild boars likewise are terrible creatures that 
few large forests and uninhabited places in temperate climates are 
free from. 

Hor. Those tusks of theirs are dreadful weapons. 

Cleo. And they are much superior to wolves in bulk and 
strength. History is full of the mischief they have done in ancient 
times and of the renown that valiant men have gained by con- 
quering them. 

Hor. That is true; but those heroes that fought monsters in for- 
mer days were well armed, at least the generality of them; but 
what could a number of naked men, before they had any arms 
at all, have to oppose to the teeth and claws of ravenous wolves 
that came in troops; and what impression could the greatest blow 
a man can strike make upon the thick bristly hide of a wild boar? 

Cleo. As on the one hand I have named everything that man 
has to fear from wild beasts, so on the other, we ought not to 
forget the things that are in his favour. In the first place, a wild 
man inured to hardship would far exceed a tame one in all feats 
of strength, nimbleness and activity; in the second, his anger would 
sooner and more usefully transport and assist him in his savage 
state than it can do in society, where from his infancy, he is so 
many ways taught and forced in his own defence to cramp and 
stifle with his fears the noble gift of nature. In wild creatures we 
see that most of them, when their own life or that of their young 
ones is at stake, fight with great obstinacy and continue fighting 
to the last and do what mischief they can whilst they have breath, 
without regard to their being overmatched or the disadvantages 
they labour under. It is observed, likewise, that the more untaught 
and inconsiderate creatures are, the more entirely they are swayed 
by the passion that is uppermost; natural affection would make 
wild men and women, too, sacrifice their lives and die for their 
children; but they would die fighting; and one wolf would not find 
it an easy matter to carry off a child from his watchful parents 
if they were both resolute, though they were naked. As to man's 
being born defenceless, it is not to be conceived that he should 
long know the strength of his arms without being acquainted with 



FABLE OF THE BEES 239 

the articulation of his fingers or, at least, what is owing to it, his 
faculty of grasping and holding fast; and the most untaught savage 
would make use of clubs and staves before he came to maturity. 
As the danger men are in from wild beasts would be of the highest 
consequence, so it would employ their utmost care and industry; 
they would dig holes and invent other stratagems to distress their 
enemies and destroy their young ones; as soon as they found out 
fire, they would make use of that element to guard themselves and 
annoy their foes; by the help of it they would soon learn to sharpen 
wood, which presently would put them upon making spears and 
other weapons that would cut. When men are angry enough with 
creatures to strike them, and these are running away or flying 
from them, they, are apt to throw at what they cannot reach; this, 
as soon as they had spears, would naturally lead them to the inven- 
tion of darts and javelins. Here, perhaps, they may stop a while; but 
the same chain of thinking would, in time, produce bows and 
arrows: the elasticity of sticks and boughs of trees is very obvious; 
and to make strings of the guts of animals, I dare say, is more 
ancient than the use of hemp. Experience teaches us that men may 
have all these and many more weapons and be very expert in the 
use of them before any manner of government, except that of 
parents over their children, is to be seen among them; it is like- 
wise very well known that savages furnished with no better arms, 
when they are strong enough in number, will venture to attack 
and even hunt after the fiercest wild beasts, lions and tigers not 
excepted. Another thing is to be considered that likewise favours 
our species and relates to the nature of the creatures of which in 
temperate climates man has reason to stand in bodily fear of. 

Hor. Wolves and wild boars? 

Cleo. Yes. That great numbers of our species have been de- 
voured by the first is uncontested; but they most naturally go hi 
quest of sheep and poultry, and as long as they can get carrion 
or anything to fill their bellies with, they seldom hunt after men 
or other large animals; which is the reason that in the summer our 
species, as to personal insults, have not much to fear from them. 
It is certain likewise that savage swine will hunt after men, and 
many of their maws have been crammed with human flesh; but 
they naturally feed on acorns, chestnuts, beech-mast, and other 
vegetables; and they are only carnivorous upon occasion and 



240 FABLE OF THE BEES 

through necessity, when they can get nothing else; in great frosts, 
when the country is bare and everything covered with snow. It is 
evident, then, that human creatures are not in any great and im- 
mediate danger from either of these species of beasts but in hard 
winters, which happen but seldom in temperate climates. But as 
they are our perpetual enemies by spoiling and devouring every- 
thing that may serve for the sustenance of man, it is highly neces- 
sary that we should not only be always upon our guard against 
them, but likewise never cease to assist one another in routing and 
destroying them. 

HOT. I plainly see that mankind might subsist and survive to 
multiply and get the mastery over all other creatures that should 
oppose them, and as this could never have been brought about 
unless men had assisted one another against savage beasts, it is 
possible that the necessity men were in of joining and uniting to- 
gether was the first step toward society. Thus far I am willing to 
allow you to have proved your main point; but to ascribe all this 
to Providence, otherwise than that nothing is done without the 
Divine permission, seems inconsistent with the ideas we have of 
a perfectly good and merciful Being. It is possible that all poison- 
ous animals may have something in them that is beneficial to men; 
and I will not dispute with you whether the most venomous of all 
the serpents which Lucan has made mention of* did not contain 
some antidote or other fine medicine still undiscovered; but when 
I look upon the vast variety of ravenous and blood-thirsty creatures 
that are not only superior to us in strength but likewise visibly 
armed by nature, as it were on purpose for our destruction; when, 
I say, I look upon these, I can find out no use for them nor what 
they could be designed for, unless it be to punish us: but I can 
much less conceive that the Divine Wisdom should have made 
them the means without which men could not have been civilized. 
How many thousands of our species must have been devoured in 
the conflicts with them! 

Cleo. Ten troops of wolves with fifty in each would make a ter- 
rible havoc in a long winter among a million of our species with 
their hands tied behind them; but among half that number, one 



*in Pharsalia, VI, 677 ff. and IX, 700-838. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 241 

pestilence has been known to slaughter more than so many wolves 
could have eaten in the same time, notwithstanding the great 
resistance that was made against it by approved of medicines and 
able physicians. It is owing to the principle of pride we are bora 
with, and the high value we all, for the sake of one, have for our 
species, that men imagine the whole universe to be principally 
made for their use; and this error makes them commit a thousand 
extravagancies and have pitiful and most unworthy notions of 
God and his works. It is not greater cruelty or more unnatural 
in a wolf to eat a piece of man than it is in a man to eat part of a 
lamb or a chicken. What or how many purposes wild beasts were 
made for is not for us to determine; but that they were made we 
know; and that some of them must have been very calamitous to 
every infant nation and settlement of men is almost as certain; this 
you was fully persuaded of, and thought, moreover, that they must 
have been such an obstacle to the very subsistence of our species 
as was insurmountable. In answer to this difficulty which you 
started, I showed you from the different instincts and peculiar 
tendencies of animals that in nature a manifest provision was made 
for our species, by which, notwithstanding the rage and power of 
the fiercest beasts, we should make a shift, naked and defenceless, 
to escape their fury so as to be able to maintain ourselves and 
multiply our kind till by our numbers and arms acquired by our 
own industry, we could put to flight or destroy all savage beasts 
without exception, whatever spot of the globe we might have a 
mind to cultivate and settle on. The necessary blessings we receive 
from the sun are obvious to a child; and it is demonstrable that 
without it none of the living creatures that are now upon the earth 
could subsist. But if it were of no other use, being eight hundred 
thousand times bigger than the earth at least, one thousandth part 
of it would do our business as well, if it was but nearer to us in 
proportion. From this consideration alone I am persuaded that the 
sun was made to enlighten and cherish other bodies besides this 
planet of ours. Fire and water were designed for innumerable pur- 
poses; and among the uses that are made of them some are im- 
mensely different from others. But whilst we receive the benefit 
of these and are only intent on ourselves, it is highly probable that 
there are thousands of things, and perhaps our own machines 



242 FABLE OF THE BEES 

among them, that in the vast system of the universe are now 
serving some very wise ends, which we shall never know. Accord- 
ing to that plan of this globe, I mean the scheme of government 
in relation to the living creatures that inhabit the earth, the de- 
struction of animals is as necessary as the generation of them. 

Hor. I have learned that from the Fable of the Bees, and I believe 
what I have read there to be very true, that if any one species was 
to be exempt from death, it would in time crush all the rest to 
pieces, though the first were sheep and the latter all lions; but that 
the Supreme Being should have introduced society at the expense 
of so many lives of our species, I cannot believe, when it might 
have been done much better in a milder way. 

Cleo. We are speaking of what probably was done and not of 
what might have been done. There is no question but the same 
Power that made whales might have made us seventy feet high and 
given us strength in proportion. But since the plan of this globe 
requires, and you think it necessary yourself, that in every species 
some should die almost as fast as others are born, why should 
you take away any of the means of dying? 

Hor. Are there not diseases enough, physicians and apothe- 
caries, as well as wars by sea and land that may take off more 
than the redundancy of our species? 

Cleo. They may, it is true; but in fact they are not always suf- 
ficient to do this; and in populous nations we see that war, wild 
beasts, hanging, drowning, and an hundred casualties together, 
with sickness and all its attendants, are hardly a match for one 
invisible faculty of ours, which is the instinct men have to pre- 
serve their species. Everything is easy to the Deity; but to speak 
after an human manner, it is evident that in forming this earth and 
everything that is in it, no less wisdom or solicitude was required 
in contriving the various ways and means to get rid and destroy 
animals than seems to have been employed in producing them; 
and it is as demonstrable that our bodies were made on purpose 
not to last beyond such a period as it is that some houses are 
built with a design not to stand longer than such a term of years. 
But it is death itself to which our aversion by nature is universal; 
as to the manner of dying, men differ in their opinions; and I 
never heard of one yet that was generally liked of. 

Hor. But nobody chooses a cruel one. What an unspeakable and 



FABLE OF THE BEES 243 

infinitely excruciating torment must it be to be torn to pieces and 
eat* alive by a savage beast! 

Cleo. Not greater, I can assure you, than are daily occasioned 
by the gout in the stomach and the stone in the bladder. 

Hor. Which way can you give me this assurance; how can you 
prove it? 

Cleo. From our fabric itself, the frame of human bodies, that 
cannot admit of any torment infinitely excruciating. The degrees 
of pain as well as of pleasure in this life are limited and exactly 
proportioned to everyone's strength; whatever exceeds that takes 
away the senses; and whoever has once fainted away with the 
extremity of any torture knows the full extent of what here he can 
suffer if he remembers what he felt. The real mischief which wild 
beasts have done to our species and the calamities they have 
brought upon it are not to be compared to the cruel usage and the 
multiplicity of mortal injuries which men have received from one 
another. Set before your eyes a robust warrior that, having lost 
a limb in battle, is afterwards trampled upon by twenty horses; 
and tell me, pray, whether you think that lying thus helpless with 
most of his ribs broke and a fractured skull, in the agony of death 
for several hours, he suffers less than if a lion has dispatched him? 

Hor. They are both very bad. 

Cleo. In the choice of things we are more often directed by the 
caprice of fashions and the custom of the age than we are by solid 
reason or our own understanding. There is no greater comfort in 
dying of a dropsy and in being eaten by worms than there is in 
being drowned at sea and becoming the prey of fishes. But in our 
narrow way of thinking, there is something that subverts and cor- 
rupts our judgment; how else could persons of known elegancy in 
their taste prefer rotting and stinking in a loathsome sepulchre 
to their being burnt in the open air to inoffensive ashes? 

Hor. I freely own that I have an aversion to everything that is 
shocking and unnatural. 

Cleo. What you call shocking I do not know; but nothing is 
more common to nature or more agreeable to her ordinary course 
than that creatures should live upon one another. The whole system 
of animated beings on the earth seems to be built upon this; and 



* eaten; pronounced et. 



244 FABLE OF THE BEES 

there is not one species that we know of that has not another that 
feeds upon it, either alive or dead; and most kind of fish are forced 
to live upon fish. That this in the last mentioned was not an omis- 
sion or neglect is evident from the large provisions nature has made 
for it, far exceeding anything she has done for other animals. 

Hor. You mean the prodigious quantity of roe they spawn. 

Cleo. Yes, and that the eggs contained in them receive not their 
fecundity until they are excluded; by which means the female may 
be filled with as many of them as her belly can hold, and the eggs 
themselves may be more closely crowded together than would be 
consistent with the admission of any substance from the male; 
without this, one fish could not bring forth yearly such a prodigious 
shoal. 

Hor. But might not the aura seminalis of the male be subtle 
enough to penetrate the whole cluster of eggs and influence every 
one of them without taking up any room, as it does in fowls and 
other oviparous animals? 

Cleo. The ostrich excepted in the first place; in the second there 
are no other oviparous animals in which the eggs are so closely 
compacted together as they are in fish. But suppose the prolific 
power should pervade the whole mass of them; if all the eggs 
which some of the females are crammed with were to be im- 
pregnated whilst they are within the fish, it is impossible but the 
aura seminalis, the prolific spirit of the male, though it took up 
no room itself, would, as it does in all other creatures, dilate and 
more or less distend every egg; and the least expansion of so many 
individuals would swell the whole roe to a bulk that would require 
a much greater space than the cavity that now contains them. Is 
not here a contrivance beyond imagination fine, to provide for the 
continuance of a species, though every individual of it should be 
born with an instinct to destroy it! 

Hor. What you speak of is only true at sea in a considerable 
part of Europe at least; for in fresh water most kinds of fish do 
not feed on their own species, and yet they spawn in the same 
manner and are as full of roe as all the rest; among them the 
only great destroyer with us is the pike. 

Cleo. And he is a very ravenous one. We see in ponds that, 
where pikes are suffered to be, no other fish shall ever increase 
in number. But in rivers and all waters near any land, there are 



FABLE OF THE BEES 245 

amphibious fowls and many sorts of them that live mostly upon 
fish. Of these water-fowls in many places are prodigious quanti- 
ties. Besides these there are otters, beavers, and many other crea- 
tures that live upon fish. In brooks and shallow waters, the hearn 
[heron] and bittern will have their share. What is taken off by them 
perhaps is but little; but the young fry and the spawn that one pair 
of swans are able to consume in one year would very well serve 
to stock a considerable river. So they are but eat, it is no matter 
what eats them, either their own species or another. What I would 
prove is that nature produces no extraordinary numbers of any 
species but she has contrived means answerable to destroy them. 
The variety of insects in the several parts of the world would be 
incredible to anyone that has not examined into this matter; and 
the different beauties to be observed in them is infinite. But neither 
the beauty nor the variety of them are more surprising than the 
industry of nature in the multiplicity of her contrivances to kill 
them; and if the care and vigilance of all other animals in destroy- 
ing them were to cease at once, in two years time the greatest part 
of the earth which is ours now would be theirs, and in many 
countries insects would be the only inhabitants. 

HOT. I have heard that whales live upon nothing else; that must 
make a fine consumption. 

Cleo. That is the general opinion, I suppose, because they never 
find any fish in them and because there are vast multitudes of 
insects in those 'seas hovering on the surface of the water. This 
creature likewise helps to corroborate my assertion that in the 
numbers produced of every species, the greatest regard is had to 
the consumption of them. This prodigious animal being too big to 
be swallowed, nature in it has quite altered the economy observed 
in all other fish; for they are viviparous, engender like other vivi- 
parous animals, and have never above two or three young ones 
at a time. For the continuance of every species among such an 
infinite variety of creatures as this globe yields, it was highly nec- 
essary that the provision for their destruction should not be less 
ample than that which was made for the generation of them; and 
therefore the solicitude of nature in procuring death and the con- 
sumption of animals is visibly superior to the care she takes to 
feed and preserve them. 

HOT. Prove that, pray. 



246 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Cleo. Millions of her creatures are starved every year and 
doomed to perish for want of sustenance; but whenever any die, 
there is always plenty of mouths to devour them. But then again 
she gives all she has; nothing is so fine or elaborate as that she 
grudges it for food; nor is anything more extensive or impartial 
than her bounty; she thinks nothing too good for the meanest of 
her broods, and all creatures are equally welcome to everything 
they can find to eat. How curious is the workmanship in the struc- 
ture of a common fly; how inimitable are the celerity of his wings 
and the quickness of all his motions in hot weather! Should a 
Pythagorean, that was likewise a good master in mechanics, by 
the help of a microscope pry into every minute part of this change- 
able creature and duly consider the elegancy of its machinery, 
would he not think it great pity that thousands of millions of 
animated beings, so nicely wrought and admirably finished, should 
every day be devoured by little birds and spiders, of which we 
stand in so little need? Nay, do not you think yourself that things 
would have been managed full as well if the quantity of flies had 
been less and there had been no spiders at all? 

Hor. I remember the fable of the Acorn and the Pumpkin* too 
well to answer you; I do not trouble my head about it. 

Cleo. Yet you found fault with the means which I supposed 
Providence had made use of to make men associate, I mean the 
common danger they were in from wild beasts, though you owned 
the probability of its having been the first motive of their uniting. 

Hor. I cannot believe that Providence should have no greater 
regard to our species than it has to flies and the spawn of fish, 
or that nature has ever sported with the fate of human creatures 
as she does with the lives of insects, and been as wantonly lavish 
of the first as she seems to be of the latter. I wonder how you 
can reconcile this to religion, you that are such a stickler for 
Christianity. 



*A fable by Mandeville, derived from Le Gland et la Citrouille by 
La Fontaine: a man who questions the wisdom of nature in allowing 
large pumpkins to grow on small creeping vines, while tiny acorns are 
supported by huge oaks, receives his answer when, sitting beneath an 
oak, he is struck by a falling acorn. He observes that nature knew 
what she was doing when she refused to hang pumpkins on an oak, 
Le., "Whatever is, is Right" 



FABLE OF THE BEES 247 

Cleo. Religion has nothing to do with it. But we are so full of 
our own species and the excellency of it that we have no leisure 
seriously to consider the system of this earth, I mean the plan on 
which the economy of it is built in relation to the living creatures 
that are in and upon it. 

Hor. I do not speak as to our species but in respect to the Deity; 
has religion nothing to do with it that you make God the author 
of so much cruelty and malice? 

Cleo. It is impossible you should speak otherwise than in rela- 
tion to our species when you make use of those expressions which 
can only signify to us the intentions things were done with or the 
sentiments human creatures have of them; and nothing can be 
called cruel or malicious in regard to him who did it unless his 
thoughts and designs were such in doing it. All actions in nature, 
abstractly considered, are equally indifferent; and whatever it may 
be to individual creatures, to die is not a greater evil to this earth 
or the whole universe than it is to be bora. 

Hor. This is making the First Cause of things not an intelligent 
being. 

Cleo. Why so? Can you not conceive an intelligent and even a 
most wise being that is not only exempt from but likewise incapable 
of entertaining any malice or cruelty? 

Hor. Such a being could not commit or order things that are 
malicious and cruel. 

Cleo. Neither does God. But this will carry us into a dispute 
about the origin of evil; and from thence we must inevitably fall 
on free-will and predestination, which, as I have told you before, 
is an inexplicable mystery I will never meddle with. But I never 
said nor thought anything irreverent to the Deity; on the contrary, 
the idea I have of the Supreme Being is as transcendently great 
as my capacity is able to form one of what is incomprehensible; 
and I could as soon believe that he could cease to exist asfthat he 
should be the author of any real evil. But I should be glad to hear 
the method after which you think society might have been much 
better introduced. Pray, acquaint me with that milder way you 
spoke of. 

Hor. You have thoroughly convinced me that the natural love 
which it is pretended we have for our species is not greater than 
what many other animals have for theirs; but if nature had actually 



248 FABLE OF THE BEES 

given us an affection for one another as sincere and conspicuous 
as that which parents are seen to have for their children whilst 
they are helpless, men would have joined together by choice; and 
nothing could have hindered them from associating, whether their 
numbers had been great or small and themselves either ignorant 
or knowing. 

Cleo. O mentes hominum cxcas! O Pectora caeca!* 

Hor. You may exclaim as much as you please; I am persuaded 
that this would have united men in firmer 'bonds of friendship 
than any common danger from wild beasts could have tied them 
with; but what fault can you find with it, and what mischief could 
have befallen us from mutual affection? 

Cleo. It would have been inconsistent with the scheme, the plan 
after which, it is evident, Providence has been pleased to order 
and dispose of things in the universe. If such an affection had been 
planted in man by instinct, there never could have been any fatal 
quarrels among them nor mortal hatreds; men could never have 
been cruel to one another; in short, there could have been no wars 
of any duration, and no considerable numbers of our species could 
ever have been killed by one another's malice. 

Hor. You would make a rare state physician, in prescribing 
war, cruelty and malice for the welfare and maintenance of civil 
society. 

Cleo. Pray, do not misrepresent me. I have done no such thing; 
but if you believe the world is governed by Providence at all, you 
must believe likewise that the Deity makes use of means to bring 
about, perform, and execute his will and pleasure. As for example, 
to have war kindled there must be first misunderstandings and 
quarrels between the subjects of different nations and dissensions 
among the respective princes, rulers, or governors of them; it is 
evident that the mind of man is the general mint where the means 
of this sort must be coined; from whence I conclude that if Provi- 
dence had ordered matters after that mild way which you think 
would have been the best, very little of human blood could have 
been spilt, if any at all. 

Hor. Where would have been the inconveniency of that? 



* Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, 11, 14.: O blind minds of men! O 
blind hearts! 



FABLE OF THE BEES 249 

Cleo. You could not have had that variety of living creatures 
there is now; nay, there would not have been room for man him- 
self and his sustenance; our species alone would have overstocked 
the earth if there had been no wars and the common course of 
Providence had not been more interrupted than it has been. Might 
I not justly say then that this is quite contrary and destructive to 
the scheme on which it is plain this earth was built? This is a 
consideration which you will never give its due weight. I have 
once already put you in mind of it that you yourself have allowed 
the destruction of animals to be as necessary as the generation of 
them. There is as much wisdom to be seen in the contrivances 
how numbers of living creatures might always be taken off and 
destroyed to make room for those that continually succeed them 
as there is in making all the different sorts of them, every one, 
preserve their own species. What do you think is the reason that 
there is but one way for us to come into the world? 

Hor. Because that one is sufficient. 

Cleo. Then from a parity of reason we ought to think that there 
are several ways to go out of the world, because one would not 
have been sufficient. Now, if for the support and maintenance of 
that variety of creatures which are here, that they should die is a 
postulatum as necessary as it is that they should be born; and 
you cut off or obstruct the means of dying and actually stop up 
one of the great gates through which we see multitudes go to 
death; do you not oppose the scheme? nay, do you mar it less 
than if you hindered generation? If there never had been war, 
and no other means of dying besides the ordinary ones, this globe 
could not have borne, or at least not maintained, the tenth part 
of the people that would have been in it. By war, I do not mean 
only such as one nation has had against another, but civil as well 
as foreign quarrels, general massacres, private murders, poison, 
sword, and all hostile force by which men, notwithstanding their 
pretence of love to their species, have endeavoured to take away 
one another's lives throughout the world from the time that Cain 
slew Abel to this day. 

Hor. I do not believe that a quarter of all these mischiefs are 
upon record; but what may be known from history would make a 
prodigious number of men, much greater, I dare say, than ever 
was on earth at one time. But what would you infer from this? 



250 FABLE OF THE BEES 

They would not have been immortal; and if they had not died in war, 
they must soon after have been slain by diseases. When a man of 
threescore is killed by a bullet in the field, it is odds that he would 
not have lived four years longer, though he had stayed at home. 

Cleo. There are soldiers of threescore perhaps in all armies, 
but men generally go to the war when they are young; and when 
four or five thousand are lost in battle, you will find the greatest 
number to have been under five-and-thirty; consider now, that 
many men do not marry till after that age who get ten or a dozen 
children. 

Hor. If all that die by the hands of another were to get a dozen 
children before they die 

Cleo. There is no occasion for that; I suppose nothing that is 
either extravagant or improbable, but that all such as have been 
wilfully destroyed by means of their species should have lived 
and taken their chance with the rest; that everything should have 
befallen them that has befallen those that have not been killed 
that way; and the same likewise to their posterity; and that all of 
them should have been subject to all the casualties as well as 
diseases, doctors, apothecaries, and other accidents that take away 
man's life and shorten his days, war and violence from one another 
only excepted. 

Hor. But if the earth had been too full of inhabitants, might not 
Providence have sent pestilences and diseases oftener? More chil- 
dren might have died when they were young, or more women 
might have proved barren. 

Cleo. I do not know whether your mild way would have been 
more generally pleasing, but you entertain notions of the Deity 
that are unworthy of him. Men might certainly have been born 
with the instinct you speak of, but if this had been the Creator's 
pleasure, there must have been another economy, and things on 
earth from the beginning would have been ordered in a manner 
quite different from what they are now. But to make a scheme 
first and afterwards to mend it when it proves defective is the 
business of finite wisdom; it belongs to human prudence alone to 
mend faults, to correct and redress what was done amiss before, 
and to alter the measures which experience teaches men were ill 
concerted; but the knowledge of God was consummate from eter- 
nity. Infinite Wisdom is not liable to errors or mistakes; therefore 



FABLE OF THE BEES 251 

all his works are universally good, and everything is made exactly 
as he would have it; the firmness and stability of his laws and 
councils are everlasting, and therefore his resolutions are as un- 
alterable as his decrees are eternal. It is not a quarter of an hour 
ago that you named wars among the necessary means to carry off 
the redundancy of our species; how come you now to think them 
useless? I can demonstrate to you that nature in the production 
of our species has amply provided against the losses of our sex 
occasioned by wars by repairing them visibly, where they are 
sustained, in as palpable a manner as she has provided for the 
great destruction that is made of fish by their devouring one an- 
other. 

Hor. How is that, pray? 

Cleo. By sending more males into the world than females. You 
will easily allow me that our sex bears the brunt of all the toils 
and hazards that are undergone by sea and land; and that by this 
means a far greater number of men must be destroyed than there 
is of women; now if we see, as certainly we do, that of the infants 
yearly born, the number of males is always considerably superior 
to that of the females, is it not manifest that nature has made a 
provision for great multitudes, which, if they were not destroyed, 
would be not only superfluous but of pernicious consequence in 
great nations? 

Hor. That superiority in the number of males born is won- 
derful indeed; I remember the account that has been published 
concerning it as it was taken from the bills of births and burials 
in the city and suburbs. 

Cleo. For fourscore years; in which the number of females 
born was constantly much inferior to that of the males, sometimes 
by many hundreds; and that this provision of nature to supply 
the havoc that is made of men by wars and navigation is still 
greater than could be imagined from that difference only, will soon 
appear, if we consider that women, in the first place, are liable to 
all diseases within a trifle that are incident to men; and that, hi 
the second, they are subject to many disorders and calamities on 
account of their sex, which great numbers die of and which men 
are wholly exempt from. 

Hor. This could not well be the effect of chance; but it spoils 
the consequence which you drew from my affectionate scheme in 



FABLE OF THE BEES 

case there had been no wars; for your fear that our species would 
have increased beyond all bounds was entirely built upon the 
supposition that those who have died in war should not have 
wanted women if they had lived; which, from this superiority in 
the number of males, it is evident, they should and must have 
wanted. 

Cleo. What you observe is true; but my chief aim was to show 
you how disagreeable the alteration you required would have been 
every way to the rest of the scheme, by which it is manifest things 
are governed at present. For if the provision had been made on 
the other side, and nature, in the production of our species, had 
continually taken care to repair the loss of women that die of 
calamities not incident to men, then certainly there would have 
been women for all the men that have been destroyed by their 
own species, if they had lived; and the earth without war, as I 
have said, would have been over-stocked; or, if nature had ever 
been the same as she is now, that is, if more males had been born 
than females and more females had died of diseases than males, the 
world would constantly have had a great superfluity of men if there 
never had been any wars; and this disproportion between their 
number and that of the women would have caused innumerable 
mischiefs that are now prevented by no other natural causes than 
the small value men set upon their species and their dissensions 
with one another. 

Hor. I can see no other mischief this would produce than that 
the number of males which die without ever having tried matri- 
mony would be greater than it is now; and whether that would 
be a real evil or not is a very disputable point. 

Cleo. Do not you think that this perpetual scarcity of women 
and superfluity of men would make great uneasiness in all societies, 
how well soever people might love one another; and that the value, 
the price, of women would be so enhanced by it that none but men 
in tolerable good circumstances would be able to purchase them? 
This alone would make us another world; and mankind could 
never have known that most necessary and now inexhaustible 
spring from which all nations where slaves are not allowed of 
are constantly supplied with willing hands for all the drudgery 
of hard and dirty labour; I mean the children of the poor, the 
greatest and most extensive of all temporal blessings that accrue 



FABLE OF THE BEES 253 

from society, on which all the comforts of life in the civilized state 
have their unavoidable dependence. There are many other things 
from which it is plain that such a real love of man for his species 
would have been altogether inconsistent with the present scheme; 
the world must have been destitute of all that industry that is 
owing to envy and emulation; no society could have been easy 
with being a flourishing people at the expence of their neighbours 
or enduring to be counted a formidable nation. All men would 
have been levellers*; government would have been unnecessary; 
and there could have been no great bustle in the world. Look into 
the men of greatest renown and the most celebrated achievements 
of antiquity, and everything that has been cried up and admired in 
past ages by the fashionable part of mankind; if the same labours 
were to be performed over again, which qualification, which help 
of nature do you think would be the most proper means to have 
them executed: that instinct of real affection you required without 
ambition or the love of glory, or a staunch principle of pride and 
selfishness, acting under pretence to, and assuming the resemblance 
of, that affection? Consider, I beseech you, that no men governed 
by this instinct would require services of any of their species which 
they would not be ready to perform for others; and you will easily 
see that its being universal would quite alter the scene of society 
from what it is now. Such an instinct might be very suitable to 
another scheme different from this, in another world; where, instead 
of fickleness and a restless desire after changes and novelty, there 
was observed an universal steadiness, continually preserved by a 
serene spirit of contentment among other creatures of different 
appetites from ours, that had frugality without avarice and gen- 
erosity without pride; and whose solicitude after happiness in a 
future state was as active and apparent in life as our pursuits are 
after the enjoyments of this present. But as to the world we live 
in, examine into the various ways of earthly greatness and all the 
engines that are made use of to attain to the felicity of carnal men, 
and you will find that the instinct you speak of must have de- 
stroyed the principles, and, prevented the very existence, of that 
pomp and glory to which human societies have been, and are still, 
raised by worldly wisdom. 



*levellers extreme egalitarians. 



254 FABLE OF THE BEES 

Hor. I give up my affectionate scheme; you have convinced me 
that there could not have been that stir and variety, nor, upon the 
whole, that beauty, in the world, which there have been if all men 
had been naturally humble, good, and virtuous. I believe that wars 
of all sorts, as well as diseases, are natural means to hinder man- 
kind from increasing too fast; but that wild beasts should likewise 
have been designed to thin our species I cannot conceive; for 
they can only serve this end when men are but few and their num- 
bers should be increased instead of lessened; and afterwards, if 
they were made for that purpose, when men are strong enough, 
they would not answer it. 

Cleo. I never said that wild beasts was designed to thin oui 
species. I have showed that many things were made to serve a 
variety of different purposes; that in the scheme of this earth many 
things must have been considered that man has nothing to do 
with; and that it is ridiculous to think that the universe was made 
for our sake. I have said likewise that as all our knowledge comes 
a posteriori it is imprudent to reason otherwise than from facts. 
That there are wild beasts and that there are savage men is cer- 
tain; and that where there are but few of the latter, the first must 
always be very troublesome and often fatal to them is as certain; 
and when' I reflect on the passions all men are born with and their 
incapacity whilst they are untaught, I can find no cause or motive 
which is so likely to unite them together and make them espouse 
the same interest, as that common danger they must always be 
in from wild beasts in uncultivated countries, whilst they live in 
small families that all shift for themselves without government or 
dependance upon one another. This first step to society I believe 
to be an effect which that same cause, the common danger so 
often mentioned, will never fail to produce upon our species in 
such circumstances; what other and how many purposes wild 
beasts might have been designed for besides, I do not pretend to 
determine, as I have told you before. 

Hor. But whatever other purposes wild beasts were designed 
for, it still follows from your opinion that the uniting of savages 
in common defence must have been one; which to me seems clash- 
ing with our idea of the Divine Goodness. 

Cleo. So will everything seem to do which we call natural evil, 
if you ascribe human passions to the Deity and measure Infinite 



FABLE OF THE BEES 255 

Wisdom by the standard of our most shallow capacity; you have 
been at this twice already; I thought I had answered it. I would 
not make God the author of evil any more than yourself; but I am 
likewise persuaded that nothing could come by chance in respect 
to the Supreme Being; and, therefore, unless you imagine the world 
not to be governed by Providence, you must believe that wars and 
all the calamities we can suffer from man or beast, as well as 
plagues and all other diseases, are under a wise direction that is 
unfathomable. As there can be no effect without a cause, so 
nothing can be said to happen by chance, but in respect to him 
who is ignorant of the cause of it. I can make this evident to you 
in an obvious and familiar example. To a man who knows nothing 
of the tennis-court, the skips and rebounds of the ball seem to be 
all fortuitous, as he is not able to guess at the several different 
directions it will receive before it comes to the ground; so, as soon 
as it has hit the place to which it was plainly directed at first, it is 
chance to him where it will fall; whereas, the experienced player, 
knowing perfectly well the journey the ball will make, goes directly 
to the place if he is not there already, where it will certainly come 
within his reach. Nothing seems to be more the effect of chance 
than a cast of the dice; yet they obey the laws of gravity and 
motion in general as much as anything else; and from the impres- 
sions that are given them, it is impossible they should fall other- 
wise than they do; but the various directions which they shall 
receive in the whole course of the throw being entirely unknown 
and the rapidity with which they change their situation being such 
that our slow apprehension cannot trace them, what the cast will 
be is a mystery to human understanding at fair play. But if the 
same variety of directions was given to two cubes of ten feet 
each, which a pair of dice receive, as well from one another 
as the box, the caster's fingers that cover it, and the table they 
are flung upon, from the time they are taken up until they He 
still, the same effect would follow; and if the quantity of motion, 
the force that is imparted to the box and dice was exactly known, 
and the motion itself was so much retarded in the performance 
that what is done in three or four seconds should take up an hour's 
time, it would be easy to find out the reason of every throw, and 
men might learn with certainty to foretell which side of the cube 
would be uppermost. It is evident, then, that the words fortuitous 



256 FABLE OF THE BEES 

and casual have no other meaning than what depends upon our 
want of knowledge, foresight, and penetration; the reflection on 
which will show us by what an infinity of degrees all human ca- 
pacity falls short of that universal intuitus with which the Supreme 
Being beholds at once everything without exception, whether to 
us it be visible or invisible, past, present, or to come. 

Hor. I yield; you have solved every difficulty I have been able 
to raise; and I must confess that your supposition concerning the 
first motive that would make savages associate is neither clashing 
with good sense nor any idea we ought to have of the Divine 
attributes; but, on the contrary, in answering my objections, you 
have demonstrated the probability of your conjecture and rendered 
the wisdom and power of providence in the scheme of this earth, 
both as to the contrivance and the execution of it, more con- 
spicuous and palpable to me than anything I ever heard or read 
had done before. 

Cleo. I am glad you are satisfied, though far from arrogating 
to myself so much merit as your civility would compliment me 
with. 

Hor. It is very clear to me now that, as it is appointed for all 
men to die, so it is necessary there should be means to compass 
this end; that from the number of those means, or causes of death, 
it is impossible to exclude either the malice of men, or the rage 
of wild beasts and all noxious animals; and that if they had been 
actually designed by nature and contrived for that purpose, we 
should have no more reason justly to complain of them than we 
have to find fault with death itself or that frightful train of diseases 
which are daily and hourly the manifest occasion of it. 

Cleo. They are all equally included in the curse which after the 
fall was deservedly pronounced against the whole earth; and if 
they be real evils, they are to be looked upon as the consequence 
of sin and a condign punishment which the transgression of our 
first parents has drawn and entailed upon all their posterity. I am 
fully persuaded that all the nations hi the world and every individual 
of our species, civilized or savage, had their origin from Seth, 
Cham, or Japhet* ; and as experience has taught us that the greatest 



*Seth apparently a mistake for Shem; Cham Ham, as spelled in 
the Vulgate ("Sem, Cham et lapheth"). 



FABLE OF THE BEES 257 

empires have their periods, and the best governed states and king- 
doms may come to ruin, so it is certain that the politest people 
being scattered and distressed may soon degenerate, and some of 
them by accidents and misfortunes, from knowing and well-taught 
ancestors, be reduced at last to savages of the first and lowest 
class. 

Hor. If what you are fully persuaded of be true, the other is 
self-evident from the savages that are still subsisting. 

Cleo. You once seemed to insinuate that all the danger men 
were in from wild beasts would entirely cease as soon as they were 
civilized and lived in large and well-ordered societies, but by this 
you may see that our species will never be wholly exempt from 
that danger, because mankind will always be liable to be reduced 
to savages; for, as this calamity has actually befallen vast multi- 
tudes that were the undoubted descendants of Noah, so the greatest 
prince upon earth that has children cannot be sure that the same 
disaster will never happen to any of his posterity. Wild beasts may 
be entirely extirpated in some countries that are duly cultivated, 
but they will multiply in others that are wholly neglected; and 
great numbers of them range now and are masters in many places 
where they had been rooted and kept out before. I shall always 
believe that every species of living creatures in and upon this 
globe, without exception, continues to be, as it was at first, under 
the care of that same Providence that thought fit to produce it. 
You have had a great deal of patience, but I would not tire it. 
This first step towards society, now we have mastered it, is a good 
resting place, and so we will leave off for today. 

Hor. With all my heart. I have made you talk a great deal, but 
I long to hear the rest as soon as you are at leisure. 

Cleo. I am obliged to dine at Windsor tomorrow. If you are not 
otherwise engaged, I can carry you where the honour of your 
company will be highly esteemed. My coach shall be ready at 
nine; you know you are in my way. 

Hor. A fine opportunity, indeed, of three or four hours chat. 

Cleo. I shall be all alone without you. 

Hor. I am your man, and shall expect you. 

Cleo. Adieu. 



FROM THE SIXTH 

DIALOGUE 

BETWEEN 
HORATIO AND CLEOMENES 

HORATIO 



N 



OW WE ARE OFF the stones, pray let us lose no 
time; I expect a great deal of pleasure from what I am to hear 

further. 

Cleo. The second step to society is the danger men are in from 
one another: for which we are beholden to that staunch principle 
of pride and ambition that all men are born with. Different families 
may endeavour to live together and be ready to join in common 
danger, but they are all of little use to one another when there is 
no common enemy to oppose. If we consider that strength, agility, 
and courage would in such a state be the most valuable qualifica- 
tions, and that many families could not live long together, but 
some, actuated by the principle I named, would strive for su- 
periority: this must breed quarrels in which the most weak and 
fearful will, for their own safety, always join with him of whom 
they have the best opinion. 

Hor. This would naturally divide multitudes into bands and com- 
panies that would all have their different leaders, and of which the 

259 



260 FABLE OF THE BEES 

strongest and most valiant would always swallow up the weakest 
and most fearful. 

Cleo. What you say agrees exactly with the accounts we have 
of the uncivilized nations that are still subsisting in the world, and 
thus men may live miserably many ages. 

Hor. The very first generation that was brought up under the 
tuition of parents would be governable, and would not every suc- 
ceeding generation grow wiser than the foregoing? 

Cleo. Without doubt they would increase in knowledge and 
cunning: time and experience would have the same effect upon 
them as it has upon others, and in the particular things to which 
they applied themselves they would become as expert and ingenious 
as the most civilized nations. But their unruly passions and the 
discords occasioned by contentions would be continually spoiling 
their improvements, destroying their inventions, and frustrating 
their designs. 

Hor. But would not their sufferings in time bring them ac- 
quainted with the causes of their disagreement, and would not 
that knowledge put them upon making contracts not to injure one 
another? 

C/eo/Very probably they would, but among such ill-bred and 
uncultivated people no man would keep a contract longer than that 
interest lasted which made him submit to it. 

Hor. But might not religion, the fear of an invisible cause, be 
made serviceable to them, as to the keeping of their contracts? 

Cleo. It might, without dispute; and would, before many genera- 
tions passed away. But religion could do no more among them 
than it does among civilized nations where the Divine vengeance 
is seldom trusted to only, and oaths themselves are thought to be 
of little service where there is no human power to enforce the obli- 
gation and punish perjury. 

Hor. But do you not think that the same ambition that made a 
man aspire to be a leader would make h ; m likewise desirous of 
being obeyed in civil matters by the numbers he led? 

Cleo. I do; and moreover that, notwithstanding this unsettled 
and precarious way communities would live in, after three or four 
generations human nature would be looked into and begin to be 
understood. Leaders would find out, that the more strife and dis- 
cord there was amongst the people they headed, the less use they 



FABLE OF THE BEES 261 

could make of them: this would put them upon various ways of 
curbing mankind; they would forbid killing and striking one an- 
other; the taking away by force the wives or children of others 
in the same community; they would invent penalties, and very 
early find out that nobody ought to be a judge in his own cause, 
and that old men, generally speaking, knew more than young. 

Hor. When once they have prohibitions and penalties, I should 
think all the difficulty surmounted; and I wonder why you said 
that thus they might live miserably for many ages. 

Cleo. There is one thing of great moment which has not been 
named yet, and until that comes to pass, no considerable numbers 
can ever be made happy. What signify the strongest contracts 
when we have nothing to show for them, and what dependence can 
we have upon oral tradition in matters that require exactness, 
especially whilst the language that is spoken is yet very imperfect? 
Verbal reports are liable to a thousand cavils and disputes that 
are prevented by records, which everybody knows to be unerring 
witnesses; and from the many attempts that are made to wrest and 
distort the sense of even written laws, we may judge how imprac- 
ticable the administration of justice must be among all societies 
that are destitute of them. Therefore the third and last step to 
society is the invention of letters. No multitudes can live peaceably 
without government; no government can subsist without laws; and 
no laws can be effectual long, unless they are wrote down; the 
consideration of this is alone sufficient to give us great insight into 

the nature of man. 

* * * * 

Hor. . . . then which way could any language ever come into 
the world from two savages? 

Cleo. By slow degrees, as all other arts and sciences have done, 
and length of time; agriculture, physic, astronomy, architecture, 
painting, &c. From what we see in children that are backward 
with their tongues, we have reason to think that a wild pair would 
make themselves intelligible to each other by signs and gestures 
before they would attempt it by sounds; but when they lived to- 
gether for many years, it is very probable that for the things they 
were most conversant with they would find out sounds to stir up 
in each other the ideas of such things when they were out of sight. 
These .sounds they would communicate to their young ones, and 



262 FABLE OF THE BEES 

the longer they lived together the greater variety of sounds they 
would invent, as well for actions as the things themselves; they 
would find that the volubility of tongue and flexibility of voice 
were much greater in their young ones than they could remember 
it ever to have been in themselves. It is impossible but some of 
these young ones would either by accident or design make use of 
this superior aptitude of the organs at one tune or other, which 
every generation would still improve upon; and this must have 
been the origin of all languages, and speech itself, that were not 
taught by inspiration. I believe, moreover, that after language 
(I mean such as is of human invention) was come to a great 
degree of perfection, and even when people had distinct words 
for every action in life as well as everything they meddled or con- 
versed with, signs and gestures still continued to be made for a 
great while to accompany speech, because both are intended for 
the same purpose. 

Hor. The design of speech is to make our thoughts known to 
others. 

Cleo. I do not think so. 

Hor. What! do not men speak to be understood? 

Cleo. In one sense they do; but there is a double meaning in 
those words, which I believe you did not intend: if by man's speak- 
ing to be understood you mean, that when men speak, they desire 
that the purport of the sounds they utter should be known and 
apprehended by others, I answer in the affinnitive: but if you 
mean by it, that men speak in order that their thoughts may be 
known and their sentiments laid open and seen through by others, 
which likewise may be meant by speaking to be understood, I 
answer in the negative. The first sign or sound that ever man made, 
born of a woman, was made in behalf, and intended for the use, 
of him who made it; and I am of the opinion that the first design of 
speech was to persuade others, either to give credit to what the 
speaking person would have them believe; or else to act or suffer 
such things as he would compel them to act or suffer, if they were 

entirely in his power. 

* * * * 

Hor. . . . What time, how many ages do you think it would re- 
quire to have a well-civilized nation from such a savage pair as 
yours? 



FABLE OF THE BEES 263 

Cleo. That is very uncertain, and I believe it impossible to de- 
termine any thing about it. From what has been said, it is manifest 
that the family descending from such a stock would be crumbled 
to pieces, reunited, and dispersed again several times before the 
whole of any part of it could be advanced to any degree of polite- 
ness. The best forms of government are subject to revolutions, and 
a great many things must concur to keep a society of men together 
till they become a civilized nation. 

Hor. Is not a vast deal owing, in the raising of a nation, to the 
difference there is in the spirit and genius of people? 

Cleo. Nothing but what depends upon climates, which is soon 
over-balanced by skilful government. Courage and cowardice, in 
all bodies of men, depend entirely upon exercise and discipline. 
Arts and sciences seldom come before riches, and both flow in 
faster or slower according to the capacity of the governors, the 
situation of the people, and the opportunities they have of im- 
provements; but the first is the chief: to preserve peace and tran- 
quillity among multitudes of different views and make them all 
labour for one interest is a great task, and nothing in human affairs 
requires greater knowledge than the art of governing. 

Hor. According to your system, it should be little more than 
guarding against human nature. 

Cleo. But it is a great while before that nature can be rightly 
understood, and it is the work of ages to find out the true use of 
the passions, and to raise a politician that can make every frailty 
of the members add strength to the whole body, and by dextrous 
management turn private Vices into public Benefits. 

Hor. It must be a great advantage to an age when many extraor- 
dinary persons are bom in it. 

Cleo. It is not genius so much as experience that helps men to 
good laws: Solon, Lycurgus, Socrates, and Plato all travelled for 
their knowledge, which they communicated to others. The wisest 
laws of human invention are generally owing to the evasions of 
bad men whose cunning had eluded the force of former ordinances 
that had been made with less caution. 

Hor. I fancy that the invention of iron and working the ore 
into a metal must contribute very much to the completing of so- 
ciety, because men can have no tools nor agriculture without it. 

Cleo. Iron is certainly very useful, but shells and flints and 



264 FABLE OF THE BEES 

hardening of wood by fire are substitutes that men make a shift 
with, if they can but have peace, live in quiet, and enjoy the fruits 
of their labour. Could you ever have believed that a man without 
hands could have shaved himself, wrote good characters, and 
made use of a needle and thread with his feet? Yet this we have 
seen. It is said by some men of reputation that the Americans in 
Mexico and Peru have all the signs of an infant world, because 
when the Europeans first came among them, they wanted a great 
many things that seem to be of easy invention. But considering 
that they had nobody to borrow from and no iron at all, it is amaz- 
ing which way they could arrive at the perfection we found them 
in. First, it is impossible to know how long multitudes may have 
been troublesome to one another before the invention of letters 
came among them and they had any written laws. Secondly, from 
the many chasms in history we know by experience that the ac- 
counts of transactions and times in which letters are known may 
be entirely lost. Wars and human discord may destroy the most 
civilized nations only by dispersing them, and general devasta- 
tions spare arts and sciences no more than they do cities and 
palaces. That all men are born with a strong desire and no capacity 
at all to.govern has occasioned an infinity of good and evil. In- 
vasions have made strange alterations in the world. Sometimes 
large empires are divided into several parts and produce new 
kingdoms and principalities; at others, great conquerors in few 
years bring different nations under one dominion. From the decay 
of the Roman empire alone we may learn that arts and sciences 
are more perishable, much sooner lost, than buildings or inscrip- 
tions; and that a deluge of ignorance may overspread countries 
without their ceasing to be inhabited. 

Hor. But what is it at last that raises opulent cities and powerful 
nations from the smallest beginnings? 

Cleo. Providence. 

Hor. But Providence makes use of means that are visible; I want 
to know the engines it is performed with. 

Cleo. All the ground work that is required to aggrandize nations, 
you have seen in the Fable of the Bees. All sound politics and the 
whole art of governing are entirely built upon the knowledge of 
human nature. The great business in general of a politician is to 
promote and, if he can, reward all good and useful actions on 



FABLE OF THE BEES 265 

the one hand, and on the other, to punish or at least discourage 
everything that is destructive or hurtful to society. To name par- 
ticulars would be an endless task. Anger, lust, and pride may be 
the causes of innumerable mischiefs that are all carefully to be 
guarded against: but setting them aside, the regulations only 
that are required to defeat and prevent all the machinations and 
contrivances that avarice and envy may put man upon, to the 
detriment of his neighbour, are almost infinite. Would you be con- 
vinced of these truths, do but employ yourself for a month or two 
in surveying and minutely examining into every art and science, 
every trade, handicraft and occupation, that are professed and 
followed in such a city as London; and all the laws, prohibitions, 
ordinances and. restrictions that have been found absolutely nec- 
essary to hinder both private men and bodies corporate, in so many 
different stations, first from interfering with the public peace and 
welfare; secondly, from openly wronging and secretly over- 
reaching, or any other way injuring one another: if you will give 
yourself this trouble, you will find the number of clauses and pro- 
visos to govern a large flourishing city well to be prodigious beyond 
imagination; and yet every one of them tending to the same pur- 
pose, the curbing, restraining, and disappointing the inordinate 
passions and hurtful frailties of man. You will find, moreover, 
which is still more to be admired, the greater part of the articles in 
this vast multitude of regulations, when well understood, to be 
the result of consummate wisdom. 

Hor. How could these things exist, if there had not been men 
of very bright parts and uncommon talents? 

Cleo. Among the things I hint at, there are very few that are 
the work of one man or of one generation; the greatest part of 
them are the product, the joint labour, of several ages. Remember 
what in our third conversation I told you, concerning the arts 
of shipbuilding and politeness. The wisdom I speak of is not the 
offspring of a fine understanding or intense thinking, but of sound 
and deliberate judgment acquired from a long experience in busi- 
ness and a multiplicity of observations. By this sort of wisdom, 
and length of time, it may be brought about that there shall be no 
greater difficulty in governing a large city than (pardon the low- 
ness of the simile) there is in weaving of stockings. 

Hor. Very low indeed. 



FABLE OF THE BEES 

Cleo. Yet I know nothing to which the laws and established 
economy of a well-ordered city may be more justly compared than 
the knitting-frame. The machine, at first view, is intricate and 
unintelligible; yet the effects of it are exact and beautiful, and 
in what is produced by it there is a surprising regularity: but the 
beauty and exactness in the manufacture are principally, if not 
altogether, owing to the happiness of the invention, the con- 
trivance of the engine. For the greatest artist at it can furnish us 
with no better work than may be made by almost any scoundrel 
after half a year's practice. 

Hor. Though your comparison be low, I must own that it very 
well illustrates your meaning. 

Cleo. Whilst you spoke, I have thought of another which is 

better. It is common now to have clocks that are made to play 

several tunes with great exactness: the study and labour, as well 

as trouble of disappointments which, in doing and undoing, such 

a contrivance must necessarily have cost from the beginning to 

the end, are not to be thought of without astonishment. There is 

something analogous to this in the government of a flourishing city 

that has lasted uninterrupted for several ages; there is no part of 

the wholesome regulations belonging to it, even the most trifling 

and minute, about which great pains and consideration have not 

been employed, as well as length of time; and if you will look into 

the history and antiquity of any such city, you will find that the 

changes, repeals, additions and amendments that have been made 

in and to the laws and ordinances by which it is ruled, are in 

number prodigious, but that when once they are brought to as 

much perfection as art and human wisdom can carry them, the 

whole machine may be made to play of itself with as little skill as 

is required to wind up a clock; and the government of a large city 

once put into good order, the magistrates only following their 

noses, will continue to go right for a while though there was not 

a wise man in it, provided that the care of Providence was to 

watch over it in the same manner as it did before. . . . 

* * * * 

Hor. Here is the castle before us. 
Cleo. Which I suppose you are not sorry for. 
Hor. Indeed I am, and would have been glad to have heard 
you speak of kings and other sovereigns with the same candour, 



FABLE OF THE BEES 267 

as well as freedom, with which you have treated prime ministers, 
and their envious adversaries. When I see a man entirely impar- 
tial, I shall always do him that justice as to think that if he is 
not in the right in what he says, at least he aims at truth. The 
more I examine your sentiments by what I see in the world, the 
more I am obliged to come into them; and all this morning I have 
said nothing in opposition to you, but to be better informed, and 
to give you an opportunity to explain yourself more amply. I am 
your convert, and shall henceforth look upon the Fable of the 
Bees very differently from what I did; for though, in the Char- 
acteristics, the language and the diction are better, the system of 
man's sociableness is more lovely and more plausible, and things 
are set off with more art and learning; yet in the other there is 
certainly more truth, and nature is more faithfully copied in it 
almost everywhere. 

Cleo. I wish you would read them both once, more, and, after 
that, I believe you will say that you never saw two authors who 
seem to have wrote with more different views. My friend the 
author of the Fable, to engage and keep his readers in good 
humour, seems to be very merry, and to do something else, whilst 
he detects the corruption of our nature; and having shown man 
to himself in various lights, he points indirectly at the necessity, 
not only of revelation and believing, but likewise of the practice 
of Christianity manifestly to be seen in men's lives. 

Hor. I have not observed that. Which way has he done it indi- 
rectly? 

Cleo. By exposing, on the one hand, the vanity of the world, 
and the most polite enjoyments of it; and, on the other, the in- 
sufficiency of human reason and heathen virtue to procure real 
felicity: for I cannot see what other meaning a man could have 
by doing this in a Christian country, and among people that all 
pretend to seek after happiness. 

Hor. And what say you of Lord Shaftesbury? 

Cleo. First, I agree with you that he was a man of erudition, 
and a very polite writer; he has displayed a copious imagination, 
and a fine turn of thinking, in courtly language and nervous ex- 
pressions. But, as on the one hand, it must be confessed, that his 
sentiments on liberty and humanity are noble and sublime, and 
that there is nothing trite or vulgar in the Characteristics; so, on 



268 FABLE OF THE BEES 

the other, it cannot be denied, that the ideas he had formed of the 
goodness and excellency of our nature were as romantic and 
chimerical as they are beautiful and amiable; that he laboured 
hard to unite two contraries that can never be reconciled together, 
innocence of manners, and worldly greatness; that to compass this 
end, he favoured deism, and, under pretence of lashing priestcraft 
and superstition, attacked the Bible itself; and, lastly, that by 
ridiculing many passages of Holy Writ, he seems to have en- 
deavoured to sap the foundation of all revealed religion, with 
design of establishing Heathen virtue on the ruins of Christianity. 



FINIS 



i 




C 2 
CD 



z 



1 30 727 





